# 4. Scoring Systems Create Convergence

## CHAPTER 4

Scoring Systems Create Convergence
coring systems feel so natural to us now, but you don’t always need
them. You can have games—and even competition—without scores.
S Think about a bunch of skaters at a skate park, all competing to do
the best trick. “Do the best trick” is a goal, but a flexible and vaguely
specified one. Different people can have different opinions about which
trick was the best. And there are different ways a trick can be good: One
trick can be more daring, another more athletically stunning. A trick can
have steeze—the skate-culture term for stylish ease.
It’s pretty hard to compare the beauty of somebody skating a chilled-out,
elegant line to somebody doing an explosive, high-flying flip. But with
casual, everyday skating, you don’t need to compare them and produce a
single verdict. We don’t all have to agree. And I don’t even need to settle on
a single winner in my own head. I can think that Shannon did the most
athletically impressive trick, but Liang had this beautiful chilled-out flow,
and I don’t have to try to decide which one was the best. The very idea that
there is a single “best trick” is already importing a hidden set of
assumptions: that there is a single value by which to judge all tricks, and a
single correct way to apply that one value.
But I don’t need any of that to have a good time at the skate park. I can
just admire all the different forms of loveliness without having to force
them into a single ranking. And even if I did happen to think there was one
best trick, there’s no reason why anybody else has to share my judgment.
We can all go skateboarding and come away with different views. That’s
fine. It might even be better that way.
We’re so used to modern competitions, which usually deliver an official
list of winners. But the joy of competition doesn’t always demand that we
reach a settled agreement about who won.

## Página 47

I used to do a drunk improv cooking competition with my friends. A
dozen guests would come over and bring random ingredients, and a couple
of us would get modestly drunk and then compete to see who could make
the best dishes out of the chaos. The whole process was a ludicrous, sloppy,
cheerful mess. It was fun to improvise weird dishes while your friends
mocked your culinary choices. It was fun being in the audience, tormenting
drunk cooks as they made questionable decisions. We had out-of-nowhere
creative hits, like a sauce of mustard powder and poppy seeds fried in
coconut oil, poured over popcorn. We had gut-wrenching failures, like my
horror of a baked white bean casserole with coconut milk, dotted, in a
moment of extreme hubris, with jelly beans. (Somehow, as I was making it,
I was sure that I was achieving the height of culinary genius. I was so
wrong.) But the unexpected hits and spectacular failures were all part of the
delight.
And the disagreement over them was part of the joy. Some dishes were
so bizarre that people could barely parse them. Once, I tried to make sweet
baked beans with chocolate chips added. Not only did people radically
disagree on whether it was good, they radically disagreed on what the hell it
was. (“Wait, is this dinner … or dessert ?”) One person thought it was an
abomination; another said it was their new favorite comfort food. We loved
the process, we loved the products, and we loved the arguing. And none of
that depended on our arriving at some singular, settled verdict.
But sometimes, we need to settle the winner publicly and decisively.
Maybe only one person can go on to the skateboarding national competition
from our region, or only one person can get the jazz scholarship. Maybe
there’s a hundred-thousand-dollar cash prize for the winner of the cooking
competition, and fifteen thousand for second place. In that case, we need an
official verdict.
This is what a scoring system does. When we agree to use a scoring
system, we are all agreeing to adopt the same clear process for evaluation.
That scoring system will deliver a single judgment, which we have agreed
to abide by. Scoring systems create agreement about who won.
Let me offer a definition:
A scoring system is a social process that delivers a quantified
evaluation , and so enters a singular verdict into some official
record .

## Página 48

A score is a quantified evaluation. It presents numbers to us not as a
report of neutral data, but as a sign of progress toward a goal. And a scoring
system makes it official. Not everybody needs to personally agree with the
scoring system’s verdict, but everybody usually agrees with the fact that it
is, in fact, the official verdict. Think about when you have judges who score
some kind of artistic performance, like the artistry scores in Olympic figure
skating. Competitors and audience members might easily disagree whether
the judges actually picked the most beautiful performance. But if we
followed the procedure properly, everybody will agree about who the
official judges are, what points they gave, and what the official final scores
were. With a scoring system, we may not agree about who deserved to win,
but we will agree about who, in fact, won.
If you need it, here’s a portable version: Scoring systems engineer a
convergence of judgments .
But, you might ask, what’s the big deal? A score is just what you get
when you add up the points and find out who wins, right? But this hides the
real action. Adding up the points is the easy part. By then, all the real work
has already happened in the background. The hard part, the interesting part,
is how we got the points in the first place—how we translate our
achievements into clear numbers that can be easily added up.
Convergence doesn’t appear magically. It requires that we seriously
muck around with what we’re evaluating. When skateboarding went
professional—when it got sucked into the ESPN X Games and got
connected up to big tournaments and big prizes—it started to change focus.
Skateboarding in the tournament environment became less about flow,
grace, and steeze, and emphasized the kind of achievements that are more
1
obvious and countable: how high you can get and how many midair spins
you can do. Importantly, competent judges may disagree deeply about
which trick was the loveliest or most original. But judges with basic
competence will all agree about how many flips you did. Height and
number of flips are easier to count publicly and together . This is why we
can all agree that Tony Hawk was the first person to land a 900—a two-and-
a-half revolution midair spin—but there is no record holder for the cleanest
kickflip.
I can count all kinds of things if I’m doing it on my own. I can count the
number of truly great American poets in the twentieth century. I can count
the number of good, authentic Chinese restaurants there are in Salt Lake

## Página 49

City. I can count how many dependable people there are in my workplace.
But not everybody will agree with my counts.
Public counting is a completely different beast. What we’re counting has
to be sufficiently obvious, so that very different people can follow the same
procedure and come to the same result. This is objectivity, for a very
specific sense of objective . Judging the originality or grace of a skateboard
trick requires some skill, and not all judges will agree. But the height of a
jump is different. There is no need for sensitivity or special insight to count
height; it’s a judgment that everybody can make. It’s a mechanical score.
But notice what happened. We didn’t keep to the same goal—cool,
awesome tricks—and invent some incredibly profound better way of
measuring coolness and awesomeness objectively. We changed the topic.
We focused our judgments on something that was easier for us all to
evaluate in the same way.
Mechanical scoring systems offer us a trade-off. We get automatic
agreement by using a mechanical evaluation procedure, but there is a price
to be paid for that automatic convergence. Mechanical scoring systems will
tend to ignore things that are hard and subtle to count. They will tend to
change what we score—and what we care about—to what is easy to count
mechanically.
It’s pretty hard for me to communicate my feelings of what makes a
graceful skateboard trick, but it’s easy to communicate a method for
measuring the height of a skateboard jump. Scoring systems are, then, a
way of clearly writing down goals and values, and specifying a procedure
for evaluating our attempts at those goals.
Scoring systems are recipes for evaluation.
THE FOOD WRITER JOHN THORNE ONCE SAID THAT THE DIFFERENCE between a
recipe and a dish is that a dish is a live thing, an idea of balance that’s in a
creative cook’s head. A dish has to be remade anew each time, in response
to changing ingredients and changing circumstances. But a recipe, he said,
2
is a dead thing, a writing down of how a creative cook made something
once.
This can encourage, in some people, a particular mindset: of just
following the recipe exactly as written. The problem with strict and
unyielding obedience to the recipe is that you’re stuck on a dead thing. You

## Página 50

don’t explore. You won’t respond and adapt to the particular details of the
now—how this particular tomato tastes today, how this batch of garlic
smells as it sizzles. You’re stuck repeating how somebody made something
once. You don’t make the transition from the strict rules to the live idea of
balance.
And it’s easy, once you’re an experienced cook, to disdain these crisp,
standardized recipes as training wheels—which can limit your growth into a
fully creative, fully free cook. But clear rules are also incredibly useful. The
value of mechanical recipes lies precisely in their accessibility. They offer
guidance for inexperienced people who don’t have ready access to some
wise and willing teacher.
Let’s think about modern recipes—the kind that tell you exactly how
many cups of flour to add, how long to bake it, and at what temperature.
These are mechanical recipes. You can follow them unthinkingly. They tell
you exactly what to do; you don’t need to make any difficult judgment
calls.
There are two mistakes you can make with mechanical recipes. The first
is never using recipes at all. Recipes will help you expand into new
cuisines, find your way to new dishes. There is a dish I love with all my
heart: Georgian chicken, grilled with tarragon and then topped with this
absurdly delicious sauce of raw garlic, walnuts, cilantro, and chilies all
blended together. I had never tasted this dish before I made it. I could never
have imagined, on my own, the way the sharp garlic and the smooth
walnuts and the spike of the chilies would blend into this rich, warm
sharpness beneath the toasty chicken. All I had was a recipe in a book. But I
could make a delicious version of it, because somebody had written it down
precisely enough that a Vietnamese American kid from California could
make it.
The second mistake is total obedience to the recipe. Some people get
stuck on a recipe. They will cook it for the hundredth time and still measure
each ingredient precisely as instructed. A recipe is only one way to cook
something; if you cook it the same way every time, you won’t see what the
variables are, and what happens when you make different choices. You
won’t understand the dish.
One of the first dishes I ever really understood was fried eggs over
spaghetti, from Naples. It’s quite an elegant recipe. In your pot, you boil
some spaghetti. Meanwhile, in your pan, you heat up some olive oil with a

## Página 51

couple of crushed cloves of garlic until the garlic infuses the oil. Then you
fry the eggs in the olive oil for a bit, aiming to just barely set the whites
while leaving the yolks still runny. Then you quickly break up the eggs in
3
the pan and toss them with the spaghetti.
If you follow the recipe exactly, you get this lovely result. The runny
yolks coat the spaghetti and form a soft, velvety sauce, and the egg whites
turn into a bouncy, fluffy coating. It’s gorgeous. And for a few years, I made
it exactly by the recipe, and it came out delicious every time—but always in
the same way.
The first time I changed things was an accident. I was lazy and hungry
and couldn’t be bothered to open the cookbook, and so I did it from
memory, and I messed up some of the details. What I discovered was that
there isn’t just one right way to do it. There’s a space I could explore, a set
of choices I could make, that would let me push the dish in different
directions. There were limits, which I discovered. Tripling the amount of
garlic obliterates the balance of the dish. But I also discovered how much
flex there was, how much freedom I had to tweak that balance. I could cook
the eggs faster, which makes them crispier. I could cook them longer and
get, instead of a silky sauce, a more crumbly, delightfully nubbly coating. I
could double up the garlic and then get this aggressive, head-clearing
wallop. Or I could put in almost no garlic, undercook the eggs a tad, and get
this soft, soothing, warm custardy version.
If you cook it in enough different ways, you’ll start to understand the dish
—not as an exact procedure, but as a whole fluid decision space. But if you
follow the recipe precisely every time, you won’t explore; you won’t come
to see how much freedom you have. You won’t learn how to adapt the
recipe to different ingredients or to adjust it to fit your particular cravings
for the day.
John Thorne knows these two problems well. This is why, in his food
writing, he rails against obsession with precise recipes and praises the
flexible, open-ended dish. But he also includes plenty of recipes in his
books—because he knows that the dish is what really matters, but also that
you can’t write it down. So he gives you a recipe and simultaneously
reminds you that it’s only a starting point.
Thorne’s writing reminds me of that old Zen saying: When you see a
finger pointing at the moon, look at the moon—not the finger. Recipes are
the finger, pointing the way to the moon. You shouldn’t obsess over the

## Página 52

finger. But you also need that finger, or you’ll never find the moon—or that
grilled Georgian chicken with garlic-walnut-cilantro sauce.
Scoring systems are recipes for values. They make the process of
evaluation accessible. A game designer can write down how you score in a
game, and somebody can read the rules and get it. Scoring systems also
make the process of evaluation more rigid and less responsive to the weird
particularities of the situation. When you’re locked into a preset,
mechanical scoring system, you won’t adapt how you evaluate things in
response to what’s in front of you.
This is the central puzzle of this book. We have these clear, mechanical
scoring systems—but they can do such different things for us. In games,
these scoring systems often give us joy. They let us play, they encourage us
to be fluid—to fool around with alternate selves and newfound joys. In
games, scoring systems help us to find striving play in whichever form we
prefer. But in bureaucracies and large-scale institutions, scoring systems
seem to mostly just suck the life out of everything. They seduce us into
accepting clarified, simplified values—and forgetting what we actually care
about.
Why do scoring systems hit so differently?
From here, the road diverges. One path will go through play. We will
need to understand how scoring systems support true play, and how they
can help us to be more free. The puzzle here is why games need scoring
systems at all. Why do we use explicit rules and strictly specified goals in
order to play?
The other road will go through bureaucracy, metrics, and public life. We
will need to understand the vital role that metrics perform in helping us
coordinate—and the price we have to pay for that coordination. Scoring
systems need to be rigid, inflexible, and authoritative in order to perform
their bureaucratic function. Because from another angle, it is the
painfulness of public metrics that can seem strange. After all, we use
scoring systems all the time to have fun in games. Why can’t we simply
jigger our inner vision and treat the scoring systems in our schools,
workplaces, and governments as games? Why not just gamify our work, our
education, and everything else, and make them just as flexible and playful?
What is it about metrics that seems to resist true play?

## Página 53

## Part 2

## W H AT S C O R E S D O

## Página 54