# 29. Some Endings

## CHAPTER 29

Some Endings
wrote two endings to this book. One is cynical and sad, and mostly a
cry of despair. The other isn’t exactly cheerful, but it does have a
I certain measure of hope—and some ideas for progress. I couldn’t really
decide how to end the book, because I’m really of two minds about all this
stuff myself.
So, in the spirit of games, you get to choose. There is Ending A: The
Cynical Sad One. And there is Ending B: The One with a Little Measure of
Hope. They are ordered that way not out of my preference, but because it
was the order in which I wrote them.
So do what you want. It’s Choose Your Own Adventure time. Pick one
ending and tear out the other one, unread. Read both and let them bang
around in your head for a while. Or read them, then cut and paste the bits
you like and add some more. Write yourself a better ending. Or stop right
here, stand up, say, “Fuck you, you dumbass philosopher,” and go play
some games instead.
Up to you.
ENDING A: The Cynical Sad One
This has all been complicated and exhausting, so let me try to put it all as
fable.
Once upon a time, we were a bunch of different people who wanted
different things, but we thought we could help each other, so we decided to
work together.
We needed to make a language to work together—to describe what we
were trying to do, and how we were going to do it. But private pleasures,

## Página 245

intimate connections between peculiar people, and the strange joys in the
process—these were hard to point to and name. They were hard to make
language for.
What’s easy to make language for, though, is all the basic stuff in the
world. And we all need some basic stuff: food, clothes, tools. And we tend
to need pretty similar kinds of stuff in our quests to fulfill our own
idiosyncratic desires. This stuff was just some tools—useful to get what we
really wanted. But those tools were easier to put labels on. It’s easy to point
to a chair or a sandwich and give it a name, and much harder to point to the
strange beauty of feeling yourself in a moment of balance. So we ended up
with more language to describe the basic stuff and less language to talk
about the strange, rich, but private pleasures. We had less language to talk
about what we really cared about.
But it’s easier to think about the stuff we have language for. Especially
when we tend to forget things, and need to write things down to remember
them.
So we started talking more about how much we cared about the basic
stuff, and less about the weird loves that had originally inspired us. And
because talking with other people is very motivating, we mostly started
thinking and caring about just the basic stuff. So we ended up working
really hard to make more piles of that stuff, and forgot what it was all
supposed to be for in the first place.
We did, though, sometimes notice there were still these vestiges lying
around: odd bits of junk leftover from what we used to care about. We
didn’t have good words for them, and had mostly forgotten about what they
were for, anyway.
So we gathered up all that weird, incomprehensible junk, and we shoved
it into one big garbage bucket.
And the name we gave that garbage bucket was “play.”
ENDING B: The One with a Little Measure of
Hope
What’s meaningful is impossible to capture in metrics, but easy to find in
games. And this is because metrics are designed from the top down and

## Página 246

enforce a centralized view of the world. They presume a kind of sameness
to life. And games, at their best, offer the possibility of a splintered,
decentralized, hyper-tailored form of life. The meaning of life, whatever the
hell that is, defies centralized approaches. It arises from a complex
interaction between our personalities, our context, our histories, and the
peculiar details of our lives.
By the way, if at the end of this book you expected me to pull back the
curtain and tell you, clearly and precisely, what the meaning of life was,
then prepare to be totally disappointed. Because giving a simple, singular
answer at this point—a one-size-fits-all answer—would be the ultimate
hypocrisy. What I’ve offered instead is a diagnosis of how we came to
expect, in the first place, that there could be a simple, clear answer that
worked for everybody.
Meaning eludes mechanical approaches. Maybe it’s because the meaning
of life is something you have to figure out for yourself. Or maybe
meaningfulness is real—but whatever real thing it is, it’s bound up with all
the messy fine grain of your particular life and circumstances. It’s made out
of the peculiar bricks of your own place in the world, your own personality,
and the strange meaning wrung from the details of your life. Whatever it is,
the world-spanning, context-crossing view from on high of institutional
metrics will inevitably miss all that fine grain. The distant metrics-makers
cannot offer tailored values. And if anything should be tailored to you, it’s
your values.
Games—and art, and all the other sorts of play—allow you to take a
bottom-up, sideways-scuttling approach to meaning, because games afford
a deep degree of freedom. They let you experiment with rules, let you try on
different scoring systems, modify them, flit between them, until you find an
activity that’s meaningful to you. Games let you take advantage of the
cognitive ease of clear rules. But the smallness of games frees you, keeps
you from being trapped by any one particular rule set. Because in games,
you can have far greater control over which rules and which scoring
systems you let in. You can navigate by feel and decide for yourself which
games you want to play.
And maybe playing games can also be a reminder of a truth that doesn’t
have to be confined to games. Maybe sometimes, when we are lucky
enough to get some control over our lives, we can try to steer ourselves in
the direction of whatever activities grant us our preferred sense of meaning.

## Página 247

We can exchange precise goals with each other, but then we can keep on
fine-tuning those goals in pursuit of our own weird, illegible purposes.

## Página 248

Acknowledgments
I’d like to thank Melissa Hughs, for an endless pile of love, support,
encouragement, useful criticism, and the deepest kind of intellectual
playfulness—without which this book would absolutely not exist.
Thanks to my agent, Eric Henney, who had faith in the weirdness of the
project and helped hash out how a book could possibly be about both games
and metrics.
Thanks to the entire Penguin team, most especially my editor, Virginia
Smith, who helped the book become less like an academic droning, and
more like a human confessing.
Thanks to Oxford University Press and my editor there, Peter Ohlin, for
taking the chance on me and supporting me as I wrote my utterly bizarre
first book, Games: Agency as Art —from which the current book draws
deeply.
Thanks to my friends and colleagues and beta readers, who have heard
me thrash out these ideas for over a decade. There is no way I could keep
track of everybody who has helped me think through the ideas in this book
over a decade of philosophy conferences and conversations, but I can thank
at least some of you—and apologies to everybody I left out. Thanks to:
David Agraz, Olivia Bailey, Elizabeth Barnes, Kara Barnette, Christopher
Bartel, John Basl, Thomas Bretz, Sarah Buss, Eliya Cohen, Anthony Cross,
Adrian Currie, Steve Downes, John Dyck, Anne Eaton, David Ebrey,
Carolina Flores, Rachel Elizabeth Fraser, Stacie Friend, Kristina Gehrman,
Jonathan Gingerich, Keren Gorodeisky, Andrew Grace, Sherwood
Hachtman, Emma Heflin, Sukaina Hirji, Tom Hurka, Aaron James, Alex
King, Brian Kogelmann, Joel Lehman, Dom Lopes, Aaron Meskin, Shelby
Moser, Ethan Nowak, Samantha Matherne, Shannon Mussett, Stephanie
Patridge, Michael Ridge, Nick Riggle, Regina Rini, Hollis Robbins, Derek
Ross, Ezgi Sertler, James Shelley, Matt Strohl, Nick Schwieterman, Jim
Tabery, Katherine Thomson-Jones, Peggy Yin, Christopher Yorke, Natalia

## Página 249

Washington, Jose Zagal, Elliot Zans, and the whole gang at Western Rivers
Flyfishing. Special thanks to Maegan Fairchild, Joyce Havstad, Tim
Sundell, and Olufemi Taiwo, coauthors and collaborators—this book draws
directly on our coprojects.
And special thanks to my philosophy parents. My philosophy mentors:
Elijah Millgram and Elisabeth Camp, who kept me from quitting the
profession in despair, and who believed in the games project when it was
still a baby. To Calvin Normore, who first put Suits’s The Grasshopper in
my hands. And to my graduate school adviser, Barbara Herman, who may
not have realized it, but set my whole life on a new course when she
casually, in the middle of a graduate seminar, said: “Of course there’s a
difference between a goal and a purpose. When you’re playing cards with
your friends, your goal is to win, but your purpose is to have fun.”

## Página 250

Notes

## PART 1 OPENING MOVES

## CHAPTER 1: IS THIS THE GAME YOU REALLY WANT TO BE PLAYING?

## 1. good and evil: Thomas Hobbes, The Elements of Law, Natural and

Politic , 2nd ed. (Cass, 1969), 174; Arash Via Abizadeh, “Hobbes on
the Causes of War: A Disagreement Theory,” American Political
Science Review 105, no. 2 (2011): 298–315, doi:

## 10.1017/S0003055411000098. ↩

## 2. Call it value capture : C. Thi Nguyen, “Value Capture,” Journal of

Ethics & Social Philosophy 27, no. 3 (2024): 469–504, doi:
10.26556/jesp.v27i3.3048. ↩

## 3. kind of communication: C. Thi Nguyen, “How Twitter Gamifies

Communication,” in Applied Epistemology , ed. Jennifer Lackey
(Oxford University Press, 2021), 410–36. ↩

## 4. game design process: Dave Chalkey, “Reiner Knizia: ‘Creation of a

Successful Game,’” Critical-Hits (blog), July 3, 2008, https://critical-
hits.com/blog/2008/07/03/reiner-knizia-creation-of-a-successful-
game/. ↩

## CHAPTER 2: STRIVING PLAY

## 1. not the purpose: This theme that catching fish is not the true point of

fly-fishing winds throughout John Gierach’s work. It is particularly
clear in Sex, Death, and Fly-Fishing (Simon & Schuster, 2003), 55–71;
Standing in a River Waving a Stick (Simon & Schuster, 1999), 13–21,
155–67; and At the Grave of the Unknown Fisherman (Simon &
Schuster, 2003). The distinction between a “goal” and a “purpose,” as I
use it, I learned from Barbara Herman, my graduate school mentor,

## Página 251

during a graduate seminar. I believe that Gierach also used the
distinction between a “goal” and a “purpose” somewhere in his many
books, but have been unable to locate that moment. So perhaps he did,
or perhaps I merged these two people in my memory. ↩

## 2. different motivational states: Much of the analysis of games that

follows draws from my first book, Games: Agency as Art (Oxford
University Press, 2020). Though I have removed some of the technical
language for accessibility, I take the substance of my discussion here
to improve on the older book in a number of ways. This is a result of
many wonderful conversations during the intervening years, but also
from my own process of thinking about games against the larger
context of metrics and other social scoring systems. Where the present
book differs from the earlier book, please take this new presentation to
be my updated view. ↩

## CHAPTER 3: VALUE CAPTURE

## 1. regulators have been captured: Ira Glass, host, This American Life ,

podcast, episode 536, “The Secret Recordings of Carmen Segarra,”
WBEZ Chicago, September 26, 2014,
https://www.thisamericanlife.org/536/transcript. ↩

## 2. anthropologists, and historians: We will encounter, later in this book,

many of the key figures: Mary Poovey, Theodore Porter, Wendy
Espeland, Michael Sauder, Sally Engle Merry, and James C. Scott.
Much of this work occurs in an interdisciplinary field called science
and technology studies, which has its roots in such figures as Bruno
Latour, Ian Hacking, and Alain Desrosières. ↩

## 3. richest empirical studies: Wendy Nelson Espeland and Michael

Sauder, Engines of Anxiety (Russell Sage Foundation, 2016). ↩

## 4. average GPA and LSAT: This was true as of 2016, when Espeland

and Sauder published their study. Since then, some of the details have
changed about how U.S. News & World Report ranks universities, but
the monolithic song remains the same. ↩

## 5. outsource my attention: The classic discussions are in Andy Clark,

Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension
(Oxford University Press, 2008); and Andy Clark and David Chalmers,
“The Extended Mind,” Analysis 58, no. 1 (1998): 7–19,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3328150. For my own discussion of how

## Página 252

trust in technology constitutes mental outsourcing, see C. Thi Nguyen,
“Trust as an Unquestioning Attitude,” Oxford Studies in Epistemology
7 (2022): 214–44. ↩

## CHAPTER 4: SCORING SYSTEMS CREATE CONVERGENCE

## 1. how high you can get: This point seems commonly accepted among

many skateboarders, but rarely documented. Some of the clearest
complaints emerged when skateboarding became an Olympic sport. As
skateboarder John Cardiel puts it: “To me, skateboarding is all about
individuality and originality. It has nothing to do with highest, furthest,
longest. Skating being an Olympic sport contradicts everything that I
believe skateboarding to be.”
thrashermagazine.com/articles/skateboarding-in-the-olympics/.
Something similar happens in yo-yo competitions. Early yo-yo
competitions focused on scoring the number of “string hits,” which
lead competitiors to move away from stylish, flowing tricks and
toward a “locked-in” style optimized for speed. Competition rules
would later shift to try to award points for difficulty and originality, to
combat the speed-optimizing trend. youtube.com/watch?
v=omcLfyApifU. ↩

## 2. is a dead thing: The theme of live dishes and dead recipes is threaded

throughout Thorne’s astonishing body of food writing. Some places
where the theme rises to the fore are in John Thorne, Outlaw Cook
(North Point Press, 1992), 19–65, 311–25; and John Thorne, Serious
Pig (North Point Press, 1996), 278–316. ↩

## 3. toss them with: Arthur Schwartz, Naples at Table: Cooking in

Campania (HarperCollins, 1998), 139–40. ↩

## PART 2: WHAT SCORES DO

## CHAPTER 5: THE ART OF AGENCY

## 1. Bernard Suits’s book: Bernard Suits, The Grasshopper: Games, Life

and Utopia (Broadview Press, 2014). ↩

## Página 253

## CHAPTER 6: TRANSPARENCY IS SURVEILLANCE

## 1. is a terrible metric: Joseph Stinn, “Donors Need to Stop Pressuring

Nonprofits to Pinch Pennies,” Conversation , November 25, 2019,
https://theconversation.com/donors-need-to-stop-pressuring-
nonprofits-to-pinch-pennies-126656; Kelsey Piper, “One of the Most
Frequently Used Criteria for Judging a Charity Is Also the Worst,” Vox ,
November 27, 2018, https://www.vox.com/future-
perfect/2018/11/26/18103372/overhead-charities-effectiveness-
donations-giving-tuesday. ↩

## 2. Merry was an: Merry’s entire discussion was deeply influential on

this book. Sally Engle Merry, The Seductions of Quantification:
Measuring Human Rights, Gender Violence, and Sex (University of
Chicago Press, 2016). The discussion of sex-trafficking measures is on
pp. 112–60. ↩

## 3. O’Neill studied trust: Onora O’Neill, Autonomy and Trust in

Bioethics (Cambridge University Press, 2002). O’Neill’s brief
comments on trust and transparency are the primary inspiration for the
discussion of this chapter. See Onora O’Neill, A Question of Trust: The
BBC Reith Lectures in 2002 (Cambridge University Press, 2002), 73.
An extended version of my discussion of transparency and O’Neill is
in C. Thi Nguyen, “Transparency Is Surveillance,” Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 105, no. 2 (2022): 331–61. ↩

## 4. evidence of corruption: Jennifer C. Lena, Entitled: Discriminating

Tastes and the Expansion of the Arts (Princeton University Press,
2019). ↩

## 5. Decades of empirical: Patricia G. Devine, “Stereotypes and Prejudice:

Their Automatic and Controlled Components,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 56, no. 1 (1989): 5–18; Tessa E. S.
Charlesworth and Mahzarin R. Banaji, “Patterns of Implicit and
Explicit Attitudes: I. Long-Term Change and Stability from 2007 to
2016,” Psychological Science 30, no. 2 (2019): 174–92. ↩

## 6. Becoming an expert: I’m relying only on minimal, generally accepted

views about intuition and skill from this literature. The classic
philosophical discussion of skill is in Hubert L. Dreyfus and Stuart E.
Dreyfus, Mind over Machine (Free Press, 1986). For a useful criticism
of the Dreyfusian approach, pointing out that they fail to account for
the possibility of expert bias, see E. M. Selinger and R. P. Crease,

## Página 254

“Dreyfus on Expertise: The Limits of Phenomenological Analysis,”
Continental Philosophy Review 35, no. 3 (2002): 245–79. For a
modernized version of Dreyfus and Dreyfus’s insights, which
combines a survey of cognitive science with philosophical work on
skill, see Ellen Fridland and Matt Stichter, “It Just Feels Right: An
Account of Expert Intuition,” Synthese 199, no. 1–2 (2021): 1327–46,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02796-9. The key work from
psychology and cognitive science is Daniel Kahnemann’s work on
fast, intuitive System 1 thinking and slow, deliberative System 2
thinking: Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (Farrar, Straus
and Giroux, 2011). ↩

## 7. That richer sense: Talbot Brewer, The Retrieval of Ethics (Oxford

University Press, 2009). ↩

## CHAPTER 7: THE BEAUTY OF THE PROCESS

## 1. resisted letting photography: Peter C. Bunnell, “Pictorial

Photography,” Record of the Art Museum, Princeton University 51, no.
2 (1992): 11–5. ↩

## 2. He embraced the fact: “Henri Cartier-Bresson: There Are No

Maybes,” New York Times , June 21, 2013,
https://archive.nytimes.com/lens.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/06/21/cartier
-bresson-there-are-no-maybes/. ↩

## 3. it smells amazing: Michael Ruhlman, Ruhlman’s How to Braise:

Foolproof Techniques and Recipes for the Home Cook (Little, Brown
and Company, 2015), 5. ↩

## 4. every piece of art: John Dewey, Art as Experience (Perigee, 2005).

↩

## CHAPTER 8: THE LIMITS OF DATA

## 1. His 1995 book: Theodore Porter, Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of

Objectivity in Science and Public Life (Princeton University Press,
1995), 9–86. ↩

## CHAPTER 9: THE SCORE SHAPES THE STRUGGLE

## 1. D&D’s critics put: Some of the most influential criticism of D&D

came from a set of essays by Ron Edwards on the Forge, a discussion

## Página 255

forum for indie tabletop role-playing designers. Ron Edwards, “GNS
and Other Matters of Role-Playing Theory,” Forge, October 14, 2001,
http://www.indie-rpgs.com/articles/1/; Ron Edwards, “A Hard Look at
Dungeons and Dragons,” Forge, June 4, 2003, http://www.indie-
rpgs.com/articles/20/; Ron Edwards, “Fantasy Heartbreakers,” Forge,
April 1, 2002, http://www.indie-rpgs.com/articles/9/. ↩

## 2. get XP for hitting: Some of my favorite designs from this indie role-

playing game world are Apocalypse World, Blades in the Dark, Masks,
The Quiet Year, and Fate. ↩

## PART 3: WHY USE MECHANICAL SCORING?

## CHAPTER 10: SCORING SYSTEMS CHANGE THE SUBJECT

## 1. Then you move: Donna Farhi, Yoga Mind, Body & Spirit: A Return to

Wholeness (Henry Holt, 2000). ↩

## CHAPTER 11: MECHANICAL VALUES

## 1. The older conceptions: Lorraine Daston, Rules: A Short History of

What We Live By (Princeton University Press, 2022). ↩

## CHAPTER 12: FLEXIBILITY THROUGH RESTRICTION

## 1. change the reasons: Carol Rovane, The Bounds of Agency: An Essay

in Revisionary Metaphysics (Princeton University Press, 1997); Carol
Rovane, “What Is an Agent?” Synthese 140, no. 1–2 (2004): 181–98.
↩

## 2. games kill play: Miguel Sicart, Play Matters (MIT Press, 2014), 3,

86–91. ↩

## CHAPTER 13: THE SECRET HEART OF MECHANIZATION

## 1. achieve legal objectivity: There is a long tradition in the philosophy

of law concerned with legal objectivity. H. L. A. Hart famously
suggests that explicit legal standards prevent the use of discretion and
adaptability to changing conditions in specific applications of law. H.

## L. A. Hart, The Concept of Law , 2nd ed. (Oxford University Press,

## Página 256

1994), 126. For a modern discussion, see Diana Raffman, “Vagueness
in Law: Placing the Blame Where It’s Due,” in Vagueness and Law ,
ed. Geert Keil and Ralf Poscher (Oxford University Press, 2016), 49–

## 64. ↩

## 2. choice between vague: Timothy Endicott, “The Value of Vagueness,”

in Philosophical Foundations of Language in the Law , ed. Andrei
Marmor and Scott Soames (Oxford University Press, 2011). ↩

## 3. hide left common: There is a useful discussion of land measures and

grain measures in Theodore Porter, Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of
Objectivity in Science and Public Life (Princeton University Press,
1995), 24–5, drawing from Witold Kula, Measures and Men , trans.
Richard Szreter (Princeton University Press, 1986). ↩

## CHAPTER 14: CHOICE OF DIFFICULTY

## 1. Also check Jeffrey: More amazing videos: “Kim Moon Jun / Empathy

/ Physix.” Doctor Popular’s “Weave,” and A-RT’s “Diptych.” For a
completely different style of yo-yo, in which the yo-yo is tied not to
your hand but to a free-swinging counterweight, watch “Ryosuke
Kawamura Presents: Shingo Terada” and 5AGOAT’s “5a Angel.” ↩

## 2. “a yo-yo is”: Ross Levine, host, Kill Your Yo-yo , podcast, episode 24,

“Ed Haponik: Enter the Yoyo Dojo,” Hollywood Modern Yoyos,
September 26, 2022,
https://open.spotify.com/show/4cMMVQwDBVzdOHlDEPtHVd. ↩

## CHAPTER 15: REFLECTIVE CONTROL

## 1. tweaking your goals: Elijah Millgram, Practical Induction (Harvard

University Press, 1997); Elijah Millgram, “On Being Bored Out of
Your Mind,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 104, no. 1 (2004):
165–86. ↩

## 2. People in cities: Jane Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great American

Cities (Random House, 1992), 58–9. ↩

## 3. an elegance akin: Doctor Popular, An Interview with Tsukasa Takatsu ,

Patreon, September 21, 2021,
https://www.patreon.com/posts/56349530. ↩

## 4. “a complicated passion for”: Robert Musil, “The Mathematical

Man,” in Precision and Soul: Essays and Addresses , ed. Pike Burton

## Página 257

and David S. Luft (University of Chicago Press, 1990), 40. ↩

## PART 4: STANDARDIZED VALUES

## CHAPTER 16: VALUES HIDDEN IN THE MACHINE

## 1. far down on: Zeynep Tufekci, “It’s the (Democracy-Poisoning)

Golden Age of Free Speech,” Wired , January 16, 2018,
https://www.wired.com/story/free-speech-issue-tech-turmoil-new-
censorship/. ↩

## 2. Langdon Winner argues: Langdon Winner, “Do Artifacts Have

Politics?” Daedalus 109, no. 1 (1980): 121–36. ↩

## CHAPTER 17: WHOSE INTEREST DOES STANDARDIZATION SERVE?

## 1. easily coordinate between: This discussion of standardization is

guided by Theodore Porter’s discussion of standardized time in his
Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public
Life (Princeton University Press, 1995), 21–9. ↩

## 2. every map represents: Denis Wood, The Power of Maps (Guildford

Press, 1992). ↩

## 3. made as aids: William Rankin, After the Map: Cartography,

Navigation, and the Transformation of Territory in the Twentieth
Century (University of Chicago Press, 2016), 119–62. Rankin draws
on Yves Lacoste, La géographie, ça sert, d’abord, à faire la guerre (F.
Maspero, 1976). ↩

## CHAPTER 18: WHO CUTS UP THE WORLD?

## 1. Sorting Things Out : Bowker and Star’s work is one of the key

influences on this book and one of the most important works in
understanding politics of data. Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh
Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences (MIT
Press, 1999). ↩

## Página 258

## CHAPTER 19: ISLANDS OF MEANING

## 1. the magic circle: Johan Huizinga, “Nature and Significance of Play as

a Cultural Phenomenon,” in Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-
Element in Culture (Beacon Press, 1955). ↩

## 2. scholar Annika Waern: Annika Waern, “Framing Games,”

Proceedings of DiGRA Nordic 2012 Conference. ↩

## CHAPTER 20: CENTRALIZING VALUES

## 1. systematically reshape the world: James C. Scott, Seeing Like a State

(Yale University Press, 1998). Let me draw particular attention to the
general introduction of legibility on pp. 9–84, and the overtly
Aristotelean discussion of the specificity of practical skill versus the
generalizing tendency of the state on pp. 309–41. ↩

## CHAPTER 21: TECHNOLOGIES OF WORK, TECHNOLOGIES OF PLAY

## 1. capacity to travel: María Lugones, “Playfulness, ‘World’-Travelling,

and Loving Perception,” Hypatia 2, no. 2 (1987): 3–19. ↩

## PART 5: WHAT DO WE DO?

## CHAPTER 22: THERE IS TOO MUCH WORLD

## 1. Every modern thought: Elijah Millgram, The Great Endarkenment:

Philosophy for an Age of Hyperspecialization (Oxford University
Press, 2015), 1–53. ↩

## 2. essence of trust: Annette Baier, “Trust and Antitrust,” Ethics 96, no. 2

(1986): 231–60. ↩

## CHAPTER 23: OBJECTIVITY LAUNDERING

## 1. The more universal: The idea that standardization leads to the

appearance of something being a natural fact comes from Geoffrey C.
Bowker and Susan Leigh Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and
Its Consequences (MIT Press, 1999). It is discussed directly on pp. 53–
106 and is a recurring theme throughout their work. ↩

## Página 259

## 2. Historian Mary Poovey: Mary Poovey, A History of the Modern

Fact: Problems of Knowledge in the Sciences of Wealth and Society
(University of Chicago Press, 1998), 8–13, 29–91. ↩

## 3. cost-benefit analysis set: Theodore Porter, Trust in Numbers: The

Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life (Princeton University
Press, 1995), 181. ↩

## 4. no consensus on: For the early history of discount rates, see William

Deringer, Calculated Values: Finance, Politics, and the Quantitative
Age (Harvard University Press, 2018), 202–10. See also William
Deringer, “Compound Interest Corrected: The Imaginative
Mathematics of the Financial Future in Early Modern England,” Osiris
33 (2018), 109–29. ↩

## 5. wine-judging process: This section builds on Alice Feiring’s account

of how the Parker wine-scoring system re-centered the wine world on
big, non-dynamic wines. Alice Feiring, The Battle for Wine and Love:
Or How I Saved the World from Parkerization (Harvest, 2009). ↩

## 6. different people will make: Elizabeth Barnes, Health Problems:

Philosophical Puzzles About the Nature of Health (Oxford University
Press, 2023), 224–50. ↩

## 7. average rock climber: This paragraph’s category-relative analysis of

health also draws from Elselijn Kingma, “What Is It to Be Healthy?”
Analysis 67, no. 2 (2007): 128–33; and Jacob Stegenga, Medical
Nihilism (Oxford University Press, 2018). ↩

## CHAPTER 24: THE SEDUCTIONS OF CLARITY

## 1. The psychologist Alison: Alison Gopnik, “Explanation as Orgasm*,”

Minds and Machines 8 (1998): 101–18. ↩

## 2. Philosophers of science: I offer an extended discussion of

understanding and faking understanding in C. Thi Nguyen, “The
Seductions of Clarity,” Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplements 89
(2021), 227–55. I draw from previous work on the philosophy of
understanding, including Michael Strevens, “No Understanding
Without Explanation,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

## Part A 44, no. 3 (2013): 510–5; Jonathan L. Kvanvig, The Value of

Knowledge and the Pursuit of Understanding (Cambridge University
Press, 2003); Stephen Grimm, “The Value of Understanding,”
Philosophy Compass 7, no. 2 (2012): 103–17; and Catherine Z. Elgin,

## Página 260

“Creation as Reconfiguration: Art in the Advancement of Science,”
International Studies in the Philosophy of Science 16, no. 1 (2002):
13–25. ↩

## 3. Science, says Wimsatt: William C. Wimsatt, Re-engineering

Philosophy for Limited Beings: Piecewise Approximations to Reality
(Harvard University Press, 2007), 3–36. ↩

## 4. good echo chamber: For an extended discussion of how echo

chambers build systematic distrust, see C. Thi Nguyen, “Echo
Chambers and Epistemic Bubbles,” Episteme 17, no. 2 (2020): 141–

## 61. ↩

## 5. vague language is: Elisabeth Camp, “Metaphor and That Certain ‘Je

Ne Sais Quoi,’” Philosophical Studies 129 (2006): 1–25. ↩

## CHAPTER 25: THE TRIUMPH OF UNIVERSAL LANGUAGE

## 1. how science evolves: Paul E. Smaldino and Richard McElreath, “The

Natural Selection of Bad Science,” Royal Society Open Science 3, no.
9 (2016): 160384. ↩

## 2. She calls this: Miranda Fricker, Epistemic Injustice: Power and the

Ethics of Knowing (Oxford University Press, 2007). ↩

## 3. People systematically tend: Joyce Berg et al., “Trust, Reciprocity, and

Social History,” Games and Economic Behavior 10, no. 1 (1995): 122–
42; Nancy R. Buchan et al., “Trust and Gender: An Examination of
Behavior and Beliefs in the Investment Game,” Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization 68, no. 3–4 (2008): 466–76; Damian A.
Stanley et al., “Implicit Race Attitudes Predict Trustworthiness
Judgments and Economic Trust Decisions,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 19 (2011): 7710–5. ↩

## 4. women who had: Fricker, Epistemic Injustice , 147–75. ↩

## 5. “For women, then”: Audre Lorde, “Poetry Is Not a Luxury,”

Chrysalis 3 (1977). ↩

## 6. interests of autistic: Steven K. Kapp and Ari Ne’eman, “Lobbying

Autism’s Diagnostic Revision in the DSM-5,” in Autistic Community
and the Neurodiversity Movement , ed. Steven K. Kapp (Palgrave
Macmillan, 2020), 167–94, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-8437-
0_13. ↩

## Página 261

## CHAPTER 26: PLAY FOR ITS OWN SAKE

## 1. To play, according to: Bernard Suits, “Words on Play,” Journal of the

Philosophy of Sport 4, no. 1 (1977), 117–31. ↩

## CHAPTER 27: ART IS A GAME

## 1. We let the world: Jerome Stolnitz was writing in the midtwentieth

century. The contemporary philosopher Bence Nanay has shown that
modern cognitive science confirms Stolnitz’s observations.
Psychological research shows: When we approach the world with a
practical attitude, we narrow our vision and attention to a small
number of features—the ones relevant to our particular interests. When
we approach the world with an aesthetic attitude, our attention
meanders, looking at everything, trying to find unexpected
connections. Bence Nanay, Aesthetics as Philosophy of Perception
(Oxford University Press, 2016). ↩

## Página 262

Index
The page references in this index correspond to the print edition from which
this ebook was created, and clicking on them will take you to the location in
the ebook where the equivalent print page would begin. To find a specific
word or phrase from the index, please use the search feature of your ebook
reader.
accountability, 50, 73, 166
accounting, 262–63
achievement play
explanation of, 30, 32–34
goals/purpose of, 39, 228–29
motivations of, 32–34
actions, 97, 173–74
the beauty in, 89–92, 95, 198, 300
coordinated, 110, 237, 243, 250, 292, 316–17
freedom to choose it, 182, 198
and game rules, 115, 154, 158–59
meaning in/value of, 228, 295–300, 308
mechanical rules and, 316–17
metrics and, 243, 250, 277, 292
shaped by game designers, 12, 21, 71, 98, 112, 119
shaped by games, 12, 20, 68, 95
shaped by scoring systems, 98–99, 111–12
transparency metrics and, 80, 82, 84
and well-designed games, 89–92, 99
adaptability, 143–44, 147, 164
addictive games, 21, 27, 181, 221
administrators, 22, 215, 260
adventure games, 21, 115

## Página 263

agency, 182
culinary, 312, 314
fluidity of, 150–52, 156
and making art, 308
new kinds of, 6, 13, 152, 158, 244
through games, 71, 150–52, 156–59
agent, an, 150
algorithms, 135–44, 201, 307–8
Angler, The , 171–72
Aristotle, 270, 296–98
art, 7, 155, 218, 251
AI dataset for, 16–17
algorithmic, 221, 307–8
beliefs about, 306–8
benefits of, 302, 307
education in, 87
finding meaning in, 279, 308–9, 328–29
and the five senses, 172
games as, 71, 89–91, 111–12
infrastructures of, 314–15, 322
measuring of, 16, 81
object beauty and, 95–96, 295–96
philosopher Dewey on, 97, 152
philosophy of, 303–4
process of, 221, 295–96, 307–8
traditional, 90–91, 95–96, 172, 304
artificial intelligence (AI), 16–17, 307–8
attitudes, 195, 229
aesthetic, 303–5
open-minded, 282, 301–2
playful, 23, 239–41, 244, 302, 309
practical, 303–5
skeptical, 240–41
Austen, Jane, 155
autism, 289–90
Autistic Self Advocacy Network, 289–90
autonomy, 238, 242, 270

## Página 264

autotelic activity, 296–97
Baba Is You , 180
bad faith, acting in, 260–61
Bag on Your Head game, 34–35
Baier, Annette, 255
Barnes, Elizabeth, 266–68
Barron’s , 45
basketball, 13, 66–67, 115, 155–56, 181, 239
beauty, 6, 302
in art, 81, 295
of games, 21, 95–96, 173, 245
measuring of, 45, 53, 81, 128
object, 95–96, 295–96, 304
in physical movement, 172–73, 268
in the process, 14, 89–98, 174, 295–300
belief systems, 43, 275, 278–79, 306
biases, 81, 262
mechanical rules/systems and, 132, 146, 161–63
in our intuition, 83–84
reduced by metrics, 50, 73–74, 83–84
and trusting experts, 87
board games, 39, 227–28
European, 11–12, 21–22, 82
modifying them, 182
online reviews of, 320–23
scoring systems of, 11–12, 65–66
shared incentives in, 156–57
skills for, 33–34
winning of, 37
Boardgamegeek.com, 320–23
Bowker, Geoffrey, 221–23
box office returns, 81
Brewer, Talbot, 85
bureaucracy, 102, 110
centralized authority of, 166, 234
kinds of quantification in, 103–4

## Página 265

measurement tools of, 17, 166
metrics of, 44, 103, 109, 252, 259–60
scoring systems of, 51, 61, 109, 126
value capture and, 9, 44, 51
See also Four Horsemen of Bureaucracy
card games, 4, 12–13, 21, 51, 90
Cartier-Bresson, Henri, 91
categories, 132, 155
established collectively, 105, 252–53
mechanical, 236
natural, 218–19
social, 218–21
standardization of, 105, 216–25, 236–37
viewing world through, 305–6
centralized
authority, 166, 203–5, 213, 234–38, 243, 246, 313–15
communication, 199–201
decision-making, 198–201, 213, 234–38, 241–43, 246
technologies, 312
view of the world, 328
charades, 14, 16, 38, 308
charitable giving, 74–77
Charity Navigator, 74–77
chess, 4, 21, 37–38, 115, 173, 196, 221, 246
Child, Julia, 137, 313–14
Chopin, 92–93
Civilization , 21, 308–9
clarity
examples of, 276–78
fake, 273–77
the feeling of, 273–76
seductions of, 259, 273–82
See also value: clarity
classical music, 92–93, 240
classification
manuals, 216, 220, 222–23

## Página 266

systems, 173, 216–26, 235, 252–53, 305
collective action/cooperation, 170, 249–50
Colossal Cave Adventure , 21
communication, 249, 286, 288
centralized, 199–201
games and, 155, 158, 244
of goals, 111, 114, 158
mechanical rules and, 244, 314
and scoring systems, 11, 20, 57, 111
shared language for, 106, 155
standardization and, 208
technologies of, 199–201, 285, 315
universal, 285–86
communities
of board game players, 320–23
languages of, 291–92
large-scale, 225, 250–51, 271
and playfulness, 302
small-scale, 49, 225, 249–51
transparency metrics and, 80–81, 86
values of, 184–85
competition, 190, 267
to earn money, 55, 297–98
in game playing, 33
for the joy of it, 54, 298
scoring systems for, 55–57, 127–28, 177–79, 231
striving players and, 228–29
without scores, 53–54
computer games, 4, 21, 35, 41, 180, 308–9
consistency, 49, 131, 140–46, 163–66, 216, 224, 316
conspiracy theories, 275–76, 279
context-invariant kernel, 104–5, 107–8. See also portability
control. See Four Horsemen of Bureaucracy: Control
convergence
of judgments, 56–57, 125–27, 226
on metrics, 205, 226, 299
of scoring systems, 125–27, 205

## Página 267

cookbooks, 59–60, 93–94, 137–40, 143–44, 208, 311–14. See also recipes
cooking
competition, 54–55
process, 93–94, 157, 168
cooperation, 170, 227–28, 252–53
corporations, 44–45, 110, 136, 167, 199, 220, 224, 234, 314
corruption, 73–74, 84, 87, 146, 162, 200
cosplay, 295
cost-benefit analyses, 263–64
counting, 271, 298
of achievements, 56
definition of, 132
institutional metrics and, 17
mechanically, 57, 109, 146–47, 161, 270
public, 56–57, 79, 81, 101
sorting rules for, 132–33
standardization of, 217–20, 223
a value-laden act, 217
wins out over importance, 101
creative writing classes, 133–34
creativity, 204, 239, 308
and playful persons, 241
in playing games, 152, 221, 302–3
the process of, 295–96
rules/restrictions lead to, 152–55
and standardization, 317
culinary traditions, 58–59, 95–96, 101, 138, 141, 311
Dark Souls , 175
Daston, Lorraine, 133–39, 144
data, 235, 238, 246, 254
decisions based on, 215–17
on game review website, 320–22
institutional systems of, 233
is not neutral, 223–25
mechanically countable, 57, 109, 146
portability of, 107–8, 110

## Página 268

power of, 108, 146
data collection, 107, 262
classification systems and, 216–25
and collective categorization, 252–53
fungibility and, 168, 224
large-scale, 168, 224, 250, 270–71
mechanical procedures and, 145–46
metrics and, 9–10, 215–16, 224–26, 245
modern medicine and, 250
data-based metrics, 9–10, 100–103, 105, 215–17, 223, 225
decentralized
communication, 199–201
form of life, 328
scoring systems, 207, 244
technologies, 200–201, 244
decision-making, 43, 185–86, 260, 312. See also centralized: decision-
making
Dewey, John, 97, 152, 306
dice rolls, 115, 118, 153–54
difficulty, level of, 5, 15, 80, 172–75, 180, 182
discount rate, 263–64
disease/injury code manual, 222–23
Domesday Book of 1086, 165
double-entry bookkeeping, 262
DSM ( Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ), 216, 290
Dungeons & Dragons (D&D), 16, 115–18, 152, 231
Dunning-Kruger effect, 77
ecosystem, natural, 29, 76, 85, 129, 166, 174, 235, 242
emissions reduction, 50, 251
Endicott, Timothy, 162–63
engagement hours, 16–17
Engines of Anxiety (Espeland and Sauder), 45–48
Espeland, Wendy Nelson, 45–48
evaluation
accessibility of, 60, 164
different ways of, 125–26

## Página 269

mechanical, 131, 146, 149, 156, 161, 170, 191
metrics and, 246
process of, 55–57, 60–61
quantified, 55–57
standardization of, 205
See also grades/grading
exercise, 41–43, 48, 86, 102, 267. See also fitness
experts, 85, 145–46, 200, 243, 271
alternatives to, 76, 81, 136
create the metrics, 45
evaluate success, 127
grasp subtle values, 85
intuition and, 83–84
mechanical procedures for, 145
and public transparency metrics, 73–74, 77, 79–87, 99
trusting them, 45, 76, 79–81, 87, 200, 253, 306
See also specialized knowledge
exploration, 275
controlled by values, 280
mindsets for, 301–2
by the playful person, 241, 302
rules/restrictions lead to, 152, 158
through cooking/recipes, 59–60, 256, 314
through games, 16, 149, 183, 190, 243
what discourages it, 259, 282
what encourages it, 190, 282
exploratory zone of value, 149, 280–82
external metrics/measures, 41–44, 47–50, 188, 233, 244, 254
factories, 167, 197, 202–8, 224, 250, 296
failing, the fun of, 34–35, 54–55, 90, 96
Farhi, Donna, 123
farming, 241–43, 299
fast-food franchises, 140, 168, 208, 275
federalism, 251–52
figure skating, 55–56, 128
fishing, 27–29, 66–67, 126–28, 303

## Página 270

Fitbit, 43, 48
fitness, 5, 33, 43, 251, 265, 267–69, 296, 314
flow, the, 15, 37, 241
food, 23, 151, 265–66, 312. See also cookbooks; culinary traditions; recipes
Food and Drug Administration, 44
“food forest,” 129–30
forestry management, 235–36
forests, 165, 223, 299
Fortnite , 196
Four Horsemen of Bureaucracy
built into infrastructure, 314
Control, 237–38, 244–46, 249
how to resist them, 301–2, 307
Parts, 169–70, 196, 224, 244–46, 249
powers of, 249–51
Rules, 126, 146–47, 170, 196, 244–46, 249
Scale, 110, 126, 146–47, 196, 244–46, 249–51, 284–85
and technologies of metrics, 323
using them/living with, 251, 256–57, 315–18
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, 109–10
freedom, 6, 196
to choose, 90, 259, 261, 264, 267, 315
in game playing, 51, 89, 119, 176, 244, 328–29
and game rules, 4, 115, 153–55, 181–82, 244
French Laundry Cookbook, The , 93–94
Fricker, Miranda, 286–87
fungible
game players, 245
things, 166–70, 224, 317
See also workers: fungible
game designers, 15, 191, 318–19
as artists, 21, 70–71, 98
control our play, 112, 119
indie, 115–19, 182
shape our actions, 11–12, 21, 89, 92, 98–99, 111–12
transform fuzzy activities, 155

## Página 271

use constraints, 153
use scoring systems, 11–12, 21, 60, 92, 99, 116–19
games
accessibility of, 244–45
the art of, 70–71, 89–92, 98, 111–12
benefits of, 13, 33, 302–3, 328–29
control over, 175–76, 178, 180–83
essential nature of, 66–69
give clarity of value, 18–20
goals vs. purpose and, 39, 98, 190–91
and harmony of perfect fit, 173–76
the joy of, 4, 14, 24, 149, 173, 176, 307, 309, 323
magical uniqueness of, 89–92, 181–83, 227–28
modifying them, 191, 230–31, 246
offer diversity/variety, 198
paradox of freedom in, 114–15
the point of, 307–8
quarantined from real life, 228–31
set constraints, 67–70
set desires, 13, 15, 65–66, 111
set restrictions, 12, 111–12, 114–15, 153, 308
study of, 20–22
tightly bounded, 230, 244
use for your own purposes, 257
the value in, 296–97
See also specific names; specific types; specific topics
gamification, 61, 181–82, 195, 207
“gaming the system,” 284–85
Gap, the, 11, 43, 76, 79, 82, 249
gardening, 85, 129, 183, 240, 291
Gierach, John, 29
global markets, 234, 250
goals, 131
defining them, 305
external sets of, 125
fine-tuning of, 329
modifying them, 184

## Página 272

versus purpose, 29, 39, 98, 190–91, 303
shared, 243
See also communication: of goals
goals, in games
accessibility of, 245
bring obstacles into being, 114–15
the heart of a game, 114–15
mechanical rules and, 245
modifying them, 174, 176, 178, 181–83, 188
scoring systems and, 111
set for players, 12–13, 19–20, 65–70, 111, 113–15
Goodhart’s Law, 102
Google, 48, 137, 212, 312

## GPA, 9, 24, 46, 107–8, 233

grades/grading, 105–8, 233, 315, 318–20
Grasshopper: Games, Life and Utopia, The (Suits), 66
Haponik, Ed, 179–80
happiness, 23, 45
harmony
of capacity, 173–74
of perfect fit, 173–76
practical, 173–74
of the solution, 173
Harper, John, 117
Haycock, Charles, 175
Hazan, Marcella, 137–38
health, 18, 45, 76, 186
classification manuals for, 222–23
concept of, 265–69
measuring of, 20, 23, 109, 186, 265–69, 299
metrics and, 20, 43, 101, 186, 230, 266–67, 271
nutritious food/exercise for, 41–43, 101, 298
objectivity and, 266–69
outsourcing of, 48, 255
play games for, 33
value decisions and, 255, 265, 271

## Página 273

See also exercise; fitness; weight loss
Hobbes, Thomas, 8, 286
hobbies, 23, 48, 82, 183–85, 191, 240–41, 251, 279, 290
house rules, 182, 231, 233, 246, 303
Huizinga, Johan, 227
Hyper Light Drifter , 35–37
ICD-10 (International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems), 222–23
Imperial , 156–57
incentives, 79, 102, 314
in games, 116–17, 156–57, 322
grades as, 315, 318–19
metrics tied to, 23, 82
shape scientists, 283–84
what they offer, 47
See also Goodhart’s Law
injustice
epistemic, 286–88
hermeneutical, 287–88, 291–92
in metrics, 291
testimonial, 286–87
institutional
environment, 9, 101
metrics, 8–11, 17, 22–24, 49–51, 99, 102–4, 109, 243–44, 328
quantification, 104, 108–9
institutions, large-scale, 17, 44, 49, 61, 108, 197, 238
internet, 34, 200–201. See also reviews, online
intuition, 83–84, 94, 125, 132–33, 142, 161, 262
jobs, 45, 82, 183–85, 191, 283, 286, 296–97, 319. See also workers;
workplaces
judges, of competitions, 54–57, 127–28, 178–79, 245
judgments, convergence of, 55–57, 125–27
Julia and Jacques Cooking at Home , 313–14
justification, language of, 277, 291–92

## Página 274

Kant, 303
Kapp, Steven, 289–90
Knizia, Reiner, 11–12, 321
Lady Blackbird , 117–19, 154
land measurement, 165–66
language, 155, 245, 267
control of, 8, 286, 293
inequities in, 287–93
inventing/modifying of, 287–91, 326–27
of justification, 277, 291–92
local/specialized, 253–54, 285, 291–92
medical, 289–90
of metrics, 285–87, 291–93
social power and, 284–88, 290–93
as technology, 290
universal, 285–86, 292
vague vs. precise, 162–63, 282
law schools, 45–48, 106
literature, 133, 155, 157, 279, 295. See also novels/novelists
logic games, 303
Lorde, Audre, 288
Lugones, María, 239–40, 302
Magic: The Gathering , 320
maps/mapmakers, 211–13, 220, 222
martial arts, 85, 179–80
mass production, 202, 250
mathematics, 19, 104, 135–36, 189, 231, 254, 260, 262, 264, 297
maturity, 132, 162–63
McElreath, Richard, 283–84
meaning, 243
boundary of, 228–29
making of, 243–44, 246
metrics insensitive to, 49–51
practice finding it, 308–9
seek it out, 301

## Página 275

meaning of life
in games, 296–98, 308–9, 328–29
in the process, 295–300
measurement
accessibility of, 73, 109
external, 41–44
of land, 165–66
mechanical, 76, 269
objective, 269–70
some things defy it, 17, 45, 101–3, 299
technologies/tools for, 198, 207–8
See also standardization: of measurements
mechanical procedures, 126, 144–46, 161, 164, 168–70, 191, 221, 242–43
mechanical rules, 236, 303
accessibility of, 58, 137, 140–47, 152, 245
algorithms as, 135–44
benefits of, 149, 162–63, 166, 196, 316–17
as communication device, 244, 314
downsides to, 94, 141–43, 146–47
explanation of, 132–34, 136–37, 144–46, 164–66
in farming, 242–43
of games, 196, 230, 244–45, 317–18
offer consistency, 146, 316–17
power of, 146–47
for specific group, 164–65
trade-offs of, 163–64
trusting them, 261–62
See also recipes: mechanical
mechanical scoring systems, 98, 128
accessibility of, 245
benefits of, 149, 154, 191
change the subject, 130
customizing them, 191
downsides to, 20, 22–23, 57, 61
evaluation of, 188
examples of, 56–57, 152, 154
explanation of, 126–30

## Página 276

in games, 22–23, 61, 149, 152–59, 190–91, 229, 243–46, 302–3
mechanical sorting rule, 132–33
mechanical values, 170, 283
discourages exploration, 281–82
downsides to, 161, 164
explanation of, 131–32
in games, 205
made clear by metrics, 187
media outlets, 314
medical profession, 220, 267, 296
data collection of, 223–24, 250
intuition and, 83–84
metrics and, 101
outsourcing to, 254–56
scoring systems and, 316–17
trusting them, 45, 253–56, 286
medicine, 80, 224, 250, 253, 270, 286, 298, 316
meditation, 27–29, 179–80, 279, 303
mental
disorders, 216, 223–24, 289–90
health, 176, 223–24, 268
states, 12, 15, 30, 38, 179
Merry, Sally Engle, 78–79
metrics
accessibility of, 109, 276, 287, 291
benefits of, 50, 61, 74, 276
building better ones, 249
core function of, 99–100, 109, 196, 205, 233–34, 246
definition of, 186–87
domination of, 256–57, 259–60, 299
downsides to, 8, 17, 22–24, 49–51, 83–84, 108–9, 196
and games, 50–51, 195–97, 205, 245–46
how to respond to, 301–2
internalizing of, 47–50, 100, 108
masks of, 259, 273
offer clarity, 20
power of, 198, 225–26, 250, 287

## Página 277

reduce diversity/variety, 198
resist modification, 191
scoring systems and, 51, 99–100, 195, 245
seductions of, 280–81
some things defy capture by, 101–3, 271, 328
trade-offs of, 99–103
trusting them, 270
an unbounded scoring system, 229–30
wins out over importance, 101
See also external metrics/measures; institutional: metrics; public
transparency metrics
Millgram, Elijah, 183–84, 253
Mind, The , 12–13, 66, 90
mindsets
networking, 304–5
outcomes, 295–300
the spirit of art, 303–4
the spirit of playfulness, 302–3
modders, 182, 191, 246, 317
money, 22, 220, 237, 260, 263, 292
devoted to, 184, 187, 240, 279–80, 282
fungibility of, 166
given to charity, 75–77
an incentive, 23, 47
and meaning of life, 279, 296–97
and mechanical values, 282
metrics tied to, 23, 75–76, 187, 323
playing games for, 181
and rules dogmatists, 240
Monopoly , 37
Monster Train , 180
moral transformation, 228
Mother Dough, 141–42
motivations, of players, 48, 71, 152, 156–57
in achievement play, 32–34
created by game designers, 117–19
set by scoring systems, 11–12, 65, 117–19

## Página 278

in striving play, 14, 32–34, 37
Musil, Robert, 190
myths, 109–10
National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), 81
National Park Service, 263
nations, large-scale, 251
“Natural Selection of Bad Science, The” (McElreath and Smaldino), 283–
84
natural world, 15, 28–29, 85, 210, 218–19, 222, 235, 263, 304
Ne’eman, Ari, 289–90
New York Times, The , 312
Nicaraguan Sign Language, 112–14
Nicomachean Ethics (Aristotle), 270
nonprofits, 74–77, 291
novels/novelists, 91, 95, 97, 111–12, 119, 133–34
objectivity, 50, 57, 77, 131, 179
bait and switch, 264–69
and burying the values, 261–64
facade of, 259–63, 270
laundering, 260–69, 322
in measurement, 269–70
mechanical, 161–63, 262
and medical point system, 316–17
metrics and, 276
in scoring, 265–66
obstacles, 32, 114–16, 119, 173–74
Olympics, 55–56, 267–68, 297
O’Neill, Onora, 79–80
oral communication, 199
organizations, large-scale, 234, 250
outcomes, 22
metrics, 49, 80–81, 203–5, 300
mindset, 295–300
value of, 68
outsourcing

## Página 279

benefits of, 254–55
of decisions, 48–49, 254–56
trade-offs of, 50, 255–56
your values, 9, 48–49, 243, 255–56
“overhead ratio” metric, 74–77, 79
page views, 20, 44, 100, 168, 237, 245, 277
Pang, Jeffrey, 174–75
parenting, 17–18, 27, 151, 176, 185–86, 220–21, 261
party games, 14, 16, 30–35, 38, 320–21
Pepin, Jacques, 313–14
pharmaceutical industry, 44
philosophy field, 19, 279
on art, 303
on games, 22, 66
grading students in, 315, 318–20
metrics and, 22, 74, 80–81
rankings in, 6–8, 10, 20–21, 23
specialists in, 157, 253
student evaluations and, 105–7
photography, 91
physical movement
beauty/joy of, 5–6, 30, 172–73, 268
inner senses and, 125, 172
meaning in, 298–99
meditative, 180, 279
Piccillo, Tessa, 174
pizza chef, 141–42
play
definition of, 239–41, 297–98
finding meaning in, 308–9, 328–29
fluidity of, 61, 302–3
infrastructures of, 311–23, 314–15, 322
for its own sake, 295–300
motivational states in, 30, 33
opposite of standardization, 227
our purposes for, 245

## Página 280

and scoring systems, 22, 61, 98
technology undermines it, 315
the value of, 21
See also achievement play; striving play
playful attitude, 23, 239–41, 244, 302, 309
playfulness
explanation of, 239–41, 302
and games, 8, 14, 22–24, 31–32, 51, 154, 198, 243–44
metrics and, 22–24, 51, 191, 195–96
metrics discourage it, 23, 61, 244
rules can lead to, 152–58
and rules dogmatists, 240–41
and rules skeptics, 240–41
scoring systems and, 22–23, 51, 61, 243
spirit of, 302–3, 308–9
poets/poetry, 56, 70, 109, 153, 189–90, 239, 282, 288
politics, 8, 83, 87, 103, 201, 216, 259–60, 270, 277
Poovey, Mary, 261–62
portability: See also data: portability of
Porter, Theodore, 103–4, 107–9, 162, 208–9, 259–60, 263
poverty, 50, 78–79, 251
Power of Maps, The (Wood), 211
Preston, Alx, 36
printing press, 197, 199–201, 203, 315
process, beauty of/value in, 14, 68, 89–98, 174, 295–300, 307–8
profit, 45, 110, 168, 183, 220, 224, 234, 239–40, 263
public metrics, 22–24, 61, 187–88
public transparency metrics
accessibility of, 73–74, 82–83, 85–87
benefits of, 83–84, 87
charitable giving and, 74–77
conviction rates and, 78–79
downsides to, 83–87, 99–101
experts and, 73–74, 77, 79–87, 99
explanation of, 73–74
“overhead ratio” and, 74–77, 79
and sex trafficking, 78–79

## Página 281

puzzles, 3–4, 180, 297
Quake III Arena , 13
qualitative
claims, 287
evaluations, 105–7
information, 45, 100–102, 107
reasoning, 103–4, 107
reviews, online, 320–22
quantitative
claims, 287
information, 22, 100–102, 105, 107–8, 223
justification, 260
point system, 155
portability of, 107–8, 110
reasoning, 103–5, 128
rankings, 20, 23–24, 54, 191, 233, 300
benefits of/uses of, 254–55
downsides to, 45–48
of games, 320–23
institutions devoted to, 46–47
large-scale, 320–21
of law schools, 45–48
modifying them, 320–22
oversimplified, 44–48
scoring systems and, 51
technology for, 320
and value capture, 43, 48
See also philosophy field: rankings in
recipes, 157, 256
accessibility of, 58, 60, 143
algorithmic, 138–44
and culinary deletion, 312–13
versus “dishes,” 57–60, 274–75, 311–12
fungible ingredients for, 167, 170
mechanical, 58–60, 93–94, 137–45, 313–14

## Página 282

old school vs. new school, 138–40, 142–45
for ratatouille, 311–13
standardization and, 58, 94, 140, 144, 170, 208
See also cookbooks; culinary traditions
reflective control
encouraged by games, 183, 188–90, 195, 257
explanation of, 183–85, 259
and game-ranking website, 320, 322
metrics discourage it, 185–88, 191, 195–96, 198, 243, 256–57
regulatory capture, 44
relaxation, 33, 38, 190, 268
reviews, online
of games, 320–23
outsourcing your values and, 48–49, 254–56
and value capture, 9, 48–49, 254
Risk , 156
rock climbing, 3–4, 19, 66
difficulty scale of, 5–6, 15, 80, 171–73
goals/rules of, 68–70, 114, 159
perfect harmony in, 173
physical fitness and, 86, 267–68
for relaxation, 38, 190–91
scoring system of, 5–6, 15
value clarity in, 86, 186
role models, 134–35
role-playing games, 21, 112–19, 152–54, 182, 191, 291, 295
role-shifting, 150–52
Rovane, Carol, 150
Ruhlman, Michael, 94
Rule of Saint Benedict , 134
rule sets, 116–17, 136, 153, 239–41, 302, 329
rules
accessibility of, 137, 143, 146–47, 245
algorithmic, 135–44
dogmatists, 240–41
essential to games, 68–70
fuzzy, 132–33, 135, 145

## Página 283

model (model person), 134–35
modifying them, 182, 241
the nature of, 133–35
and new kinds of actions, 115
only following them, 94
paradox of, 152–54, 158
and playful persons, 239–41
principle, 133–35, 137, 139–40, 145
refuge of, 4
set by games, 112
skeptics, 240–41
See also mechanical rules
running/runners, 33, 39, 67–68, 269, 281, 299, 303, 308
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 261
SAT scores, 303
Sauder, Michael, 45–48
scale, 145, 170, 188, 225–26, 233. See also Four Horsemen of Bureaucracy:
Scale
schools
athletes of, 50–51, 181
evaluation by, 314
tests in, 315, 318
See also students
science, 270, 273–74, 276
art as, 306–7
authority of, 259–60
categorization of, 252–53
data collection by, 224, 262
experts/specialists in, 253
good science, 278, 283–84
and measures for health, 266, 269
methods of, 278, 283
responsive to errors, 278
shaped by incentives, 283–84
scoring systems, 300
accessibility of, 245

## Página 284

being drawn to, 17–20
benefits of, 6, 13, 15–17, 19, 22–23, 39–40, 60–61
choosing them, 15–17, 98
control of, 318–20, 329
core function of, 109, 111
definition of, 55–57, 125–26
downsides to, 22–23, 43–44, 126, 179
examples of, 265–66
of games, 11–17, 21–22, 51, 60–61, 70–71, 92, 98–99, 111, 205, 230–31,
257
large-scale, 319–21
modifying them, 115, 174, 181–83, 191, 320, 329
not always needed, 53–55
power of, 126, 320
shape our desires, 13
Scott, James, 234–37, 241–42, 250
“screen time,” 220–21
Seeing Like A State (Scott), 234
self
alternate, 13, 16, 38, 61, 71, 111, 150, 158, 227–28
in-game, 119, 228
self-effacing end, 38
senses, the five, 172
sensitivity, 57, 108, 157
filtered out by metrics, 84, 109, 125
and qualitative reasoning, 107
and recipes, 143–45
shut out by mechanical rules, 133, 164–65, 168, 170
when it’s needed, 82, 143
sensory judgment, 94, 142–43
sex trafficking, 78–79
sexual harassment, 287–88
shelters, building of, 75–77
Sicart, Miguel, 154
Sign , 112–14
Silicon Valley investors, 239
skateboarding, 53–54, 56–57, 219, 231

## Página 285

Smaldino, Paul, 283–84
social
categories, 219
inequity, 287–93
injustice, 286, 291
power, 103, 284–88, 290–93
relationships, 13, 95–96, 109, 151–52
signals, 284–85
systems, 283–85
technology, 125, 228
value clarity, 19–20, 187
value collapse, 293
social media, 48
centralized focus of, 200–201
follower counts on, 10, 20, 24
metrics of, 10–11
scoring systems of, 10–11
software industry, 245
Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences (Bowker and
Star), 221–23
spatial manipulation, 33–34, 97
specialized knowledge, 80, 136, 235–37, 241–43, 253–54. See also experts
speedrunning, 182, 231, 246
sports, 50–51, 112, 159. See also specific types
Spyfall , 30–33
standard operating procedure (SOP), 164
standardization, 105, 235, 250, 300
of our attention, 211–13, 221–24
of categories, 216–25, 236–37
centralized authority and, 203–5
centralized decisions and, 198–200, 242
of counting, 217–20
definition of, 207
downsides to, 211, 225
in games, 230, 317
of measurements, 198, 207–8, 269
metrics and, 196, 198, 205, 207, 215, 233, 246

## Página 286

power of, 198–99
in recipes, 58, 94, 140, 144, 170, 208
value-laden, 207, 210, 213
who it serves, 207–13, 225–26
See also classification systems; technology: standardization in;
time/timing systems
Star, Susan Leigh, 221–23
“states,” 234–37, 242–43, 250
statistics, 46, 103, 216, 222, 290
status, 6–8, 20, 23, 181, 244, 283, 285
Stolnitz, Jerome, 303–4
strategy games, 4, 21, 34
striving play, 24, 182
aesthetic, 174, 188, 303–4
examples of, 29–37
explanation of, 14, 30, 32–33, 181
goals/purpose of, 37–39, 70, 228–30
motivational inversion in, 14, 32–33
motivations of, 32–34, 37
scoring systems and, 39–40, 61, 98
values the struggle, 30–35, 37–39
video games and, 35–37
students, 24–25
and college rankings, 45–48
evaluation of, 46, 105–8, 315, 318–20
success metrics for, 22, 74, 81, 100, 215, 291
value capture and, 9, 48
See also GPA; grades/grading; schools
stupid games, 34–35, 38, 190, 221
subjectivity, 132, 161, 260, 262, 264, 322
success
definitions of, 6, 8, 16–17, 22, 286
external markers of, 124–25
and “gaming the system,” 284–85
measuring of, 75, 198, 300
and metrics, 20, 85, 187, 198, 215, 273, 291–93
motivated by, 124–25

## Página 287

narrowed notion of, 282, 293
“overhead ratio” and, 75
scoring systems and, 65, 116–19, 126–27, 156, 188
shared conclusions about, 126–27
shared language of, 19
Suits, Bernard, 66–68, 114–15, 178, 296–98, 308
Super Hexagon , 309
Super Mario Bros. , 182
Super Mario Odyssey , 16, 90, 92, 231
surveillance, 84
Takatsu, Tsukasa, 188–91
teachers, 17, 58, 86, 123–25, 150–52, 183
technology, 218, 250, 314
of communication, 199–201, 315
for complicated world, 252, 254
of factories, 202–5
of games, 230, 244
metrics as, 197, 215, 226, 230, 243, 246, 323
for rankings, 320, 322–23
specialized knowledge and, 241–42
standardization in, 167, 198–99, 202–5, 213
tools for attention, 211–13, 215
value decisions and, 255
value-laden, 197–98, 217
value-neutral theory of, 201
Tetris , 33, 66, 97, 173
Thorne, John, 57–58, 60, 274
TikTok, 221
time and time measurement systems, 198, 209–11, 220
toys, 317
Tracking in Persons Report ( TIP Report ), 78–79
transparency metrics, 50, 276. See also public transparency metrics
tribal casinos, 220
trust
in communities, 80–81
centralized, 201

## Página 288

essence of, 255–56
in experts, 45, 76, 79–81, 87, 253, 200, 306
in mechanical rules, 261–62
in metrics, 270
in team members, 317
and transparency, 84–85, 87, 99
undermining of, 80
Trust in Numbers (Porter), 103
Twister , 34–35, 38, 96
Twitter, 10–11
understanding, definition of, 274–75
ungrading movement, 318–19
university administration, 22, 27, 215
US census, 222
U.S. News & World Report , 45–48
Utah, 27, 81, 171–72, 209
value
clarity, 18–20, 186
collapse, 280, 285, 293, 303, 305
convergence, 245
decisions, 215, 224, 255, 260–61, 263–71, 313
federalism, 251–52
judgments, 100, 260, 291–92
simplification, 249, 275, 277, 279–80, 282
subtle, 9, 85–87, 102–4, 128, 130, 191, 241, 278–80, 287, 292, 300
value capture, 187, 292
downsides to, 43, 48, 261
examples of, 43, 45–48
explanation of, 8–10, 23–24, 43
external metrics and, 41–44, 125, 188, 243, 254
and game playing, 23–24, 50–51, 303
internalizing metrics and, 47–50, 108
by mechanical value, 164
outsourcing your values and, 48–50, 254
by scoring system, 125

## Página 289

studies of, 44–48
transparency metrics and, 82
and value collapse, 280
values, 186, 241
accessibility of, 85, 130, 158–59, 170
of activities, 85–87
burying them, 261–64
in classification systems, 225–26
core, 47–49
in data sets, 215–16
external system of, 187–88
that fit communities, 184–85
that fit you, 183–85, 188
function of, 256
fuzzy, 131, 280–82, 284
and game playing, 243–44
measuring of, 103, 233–38
and metrics, 198, 230, 243, 249, 251
outsourcing them, 9, 48–50, 243, 254–56
and scoring systems, 16, 43–44, 60–61, 158–59
shape our lives, 183–84
standardization of, 198–99, 205, 207, 226
tailoring them, 251, 328
tell us what’s important, 279–80
See also mechanical values
video games, 13, 16, 35–37, 66, 90, 173, 180, 182, 309
voting laws/rights, 162–63, 220
Waern, Annika, 228
war games, 156–57, 320–21
weapons, 250
weight loss, 24, 42–43, 86, 102, 265–66, 269, 299, 303
Wimsatt, William, 278
wine tasting/scoring, 265–66, 271
Winner, Langdon, 201–5, 315
winning
in achievement play, 30, 33–34, 39, 228–29

## Página 290

deeper meaning of, 13
and goal vs. purpose, 39, 332
investment in, 14, 35–37, 156–57
players care about, 30–37
scoring systems for, 13, 55–56, 155
in striving play, 14, 30, 33–34, 39, 174, 228–29
value the struggle for, 14, 30–35, 37, 39
Wood, Denis, 211–12
workers, 242–43
factory line, 197, 202–4
fungible, 168, 170, 224, 235–37, 245
and metrics, 233
workplaces, 61, 181–82, 195, 314
World Health Organization, 222
yoga, 4, 41, 86, 102, 179
builds flexibility/fluidity, 123–24, 158
inner senses and, 172
scoring systems of, 124–25
YouTube, 174, 189, 221
yo-yo play, 308
competitions for, 177–79, 190
finding the value in, 241
for the joy of it, 176, 178, 309
modern, high-end, 174–76
old school vs. modern, 176–79
standardization in, 317
Takatsu’s yo-yo repeaters, 189–91

## Página 291

## THIS IS JUST THE BEGINNING

Find us online and join the conversation

## TWITTER / X

twitter.com/penguinukbooks

## FACEBOOK

facebook.com/penguinbooks

## INSTAGRAM

instagram.com/penguinukbooks

## YOUTUBE

youtube.com/penguinbooks

## PINTEREST

pinterest.com/penguinukbooks

## LINKEDIN

linkedin.com/company/penguin-random-house-uk

## TIKTOK

tiktok.com/@penguinukbooks
For the latest books, recommendations, author interviews and more
Sign up to the Penguin Newsletter
Find out more about the author and discover
your next read at Penguin.co.uk

## Página 292

## PENGUIN BOOKS

UK | USA | Canada | Ireland | Australia
New Zealand | India | South Africa
Penguin Books is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies whose addresses can be
found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com.
www.penguin.co.uk
First published in the United States of America by Penguin Press 2026
First published in Great Britain by Allen Lane 2026
Copyright © Christopher Thi Nguyen, 2026
The moral right of the author has been asserted
Cover photograph © Getty Images
Cover design: Olga Kominek

## ISBN: 978-0-241-65398-2

Penguin Random House values and supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages
diverse voices, promotes freedom of expression and supports a vibrant culture. Thank you for
purchasing an authorized edition of this book and for respecting intellectual property laws by not
reproducing, scanning or distributing any part of it by any means without permission. You are
supporting authors and enabling Penguin Random House to continue to publish books for everyone.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner for the purpose of training artificial
intelligence technologies or systems. In accordance with Article 4(3) of the DSM Directive 2019/790,
Penguin Random House expressly reserves this work from the text and data mining exception.
The authorized representative in the EEA is Penguin Random House Ireland, Morrison Chambers, 32
Nassau Street, Dublin D02 YH68
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
All correspondence to:
Penguin Books
Penguin Random House
One Embassy Gardens, 8 Viaduct Gardens, London SW11 7BW

## Página 293

Cover for The Score

## Página 294

This file was downloaded from Z-Library project
Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone.
z-library.sk z-lib.gs z-lib.fm go-to-library.sk
O ffi cial Telegram channel
Z-Access
https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library