# 16. Values Hidden in the Machine

## CHAPTER 16

Values Hidden in the Machine
n part three, we studied the similarity at the heart of games and metrics:
the scoring system. It started to look like what really mattered was our
I internal attitude toward them: whether or not we took reflective control.
And the basic nature of games—temporary and bounded in space and time
—encourages us to flit into and out of them, which invites reflective
control. But the nature of metrics discourages reflective control, because
metrics are pervasive and present themselves as universal.
At this point, you might be thinking there is an easy solution, in two
parts:
First, what really matters is your attitude. So perk up, be strong, exert
some willpower, and just force yourself to take reflective control over
which metrics you let in.
Second, if games help us take on the right attitude, then we should make
our metrics more like games. We should gamify them and encourage
playfulness all around. Gamify the workplace, gamify education, and we’ll
help bring back reflective control.
But these solutions ignore how deep the problem is. We can make metrics
look superficially more like games, by adding the window dressing of
levels and awards and experience points. But their inner workings—their
core functionality—won’t change. They will still be bound by clear rules
and rigidified to work at scale. They still won’t encourage us to skip
around, to tailor, to change.
This is why it is so hard for us, as individual people, to simply take
reflective control. Because metrics are part of a larger world order—a rigid,
inflexible structure that resists our attempts at reflective control. Metrics are
the vanguard of a whole invading force, all working to subtly erode our
freedom to decide, and standardize how we think and what we care about.

## Página 150

And we can’t just keep the useful bit of metrics and throw out the restrictive
parts. The standardizing pressure of metrics is a crucial part of their
function. What metrics do for us is bound up, inextricably, with what they
do to us.
In part four we’re looking for the bigger picture. We’re looking to see
how metrics rewrite the world and make us more willing to accept them
into our hearts. We’ve already met the first three Horsemen: Scale, Rules,
and Parts. But these do not give us the full story of how metrics function
and why it will be so hard to make them more playful. Notice that games
also use Scales, Rules, and Parts in the name of play. Games have clear
mechanical rules that make them easy to learn. Those rules make things
more interchangeable. It’s easier to swap out one player for another in a
game, or to switch games. And games can scale up; there are international
chess ratings and worldwide Fortnite leaderboards. But games do not
subject us to the same pressure to standardize our sense of meaning. To
understand what makes metrics truly distinctive—and truly threatening—
we need to find the fourth and final Horseman, the ruling spirit of the whole
thing.
Oh, and the neat division between games and metrics is coming to an
end. The paths are converging. Things will be messier from here on out.
METRICS, AND THE LARGE-SCALE INSTITUTIONAL FORCES THEY are entangled
with, have changed the basic structure of human life. But it’s easy to miss
how dramatic these changes have been, because we are immersed in this
new world. The changes have gone so deep into our way of life that metrics
have made themselves look natural. We have a name for this kind of thing,
a new way of doing things that shifts the world so profoundly that we forget
how things had ever been otherwise. So let’s give them their proper name:
Metrics are a world-transforming form of technology .
Every major new technology alters the pattern of human life. The
printing press, the engine, the computer—each ushers in a revolution,
upsetting the balance of power, restructuring daily life, and rewriting our
psychology and desires.
A technology is a reproducible innovation. And technologies aren’t just
physical things. Some technologies are ideas—new ways of arranging the

## Página 151

world, new procedures for doing things, like the idea of Arabic numerals, or
the technique of arranging people into a factory assembly line.
And we, the users of the technology, don’t always have full control over
what the technology does to us. The intrinsic nature of a technology can
push the world in particular directions; technologies almost have a will of
their own. The philosopher’s lingo for this is that technologies are value-
laden . A technology isn’t merely a neutral tool; each intrinsically embodies
and supports certain values over others. And different technologies support
different values. We do not simply use our tools. Our tools also shape and
transform us.
Games and metrics are both powerful technologies, but they embody
different values. Games push us toward weird variety. They fill the world
with radically different modes of action, each full of its own peculiar
beauties and joys. They invite us to tinker with them, to tailor them to our
needs. This patchwork world encourages playfulness. It reminds us to take
control of the shape of our activities and the values that lie under them.
Metrics push us in the opposite direction. They reduce diversity and
variety. They especially drain the world of diversity of meanings . They steer
the world toward a singular and monolithic set of values. They reduce our
exposure to deeply different modes of valuing, which erodes our reflective
control. It’s hard to make an informed choice when you don’t even know
when there was a choice to be made in the first place.
Metrics push us to standardize our values .
There are many technologies of standardization. Rulers are part of the
technology that standardizes length measurements, and clocks are part of
the technology that standardizes time. But metrics do something even
deeper: They are a technology that standardizes how we measure success.
They standardize the process by which we judge each other and ourselves.
To fully understand the power of metrics, we need to understand the power
of standardization—how it works, why we want it, and how it changes the
deep tissue of our social lives. And we need to see how standardization gets
wrapped up with another powerful force: the force of centralized decision-
making. Because standardization doesn’t appear from nowhere. It needs a
central authority to decide on, stabilize, and enforce those standards.
We need to see how these two forces—standardization and centralization
—get baked into the basic infrastructure of the modern world, into our

## Página 152

machines and our institutions. And then they start leaking into everything,
including how we find meaning in our lives.
WE’RE ABOUT TO DO A DEEP DIVE INTO THE HEART OF THE modern world, to try
to get a glimpse of the hidden forces that shape our lives. Things are about
to get pretty abstract, so let’s start with something relatively simple. Think
about how different communication technologies change the basic nature of
information flow.
Before the printing press, news mostly spread by word of mouth.
Individuals heard stuff and then repeated it to other individuals.
Communication happened through a distributed network of individuals who
had the power to change, reinterpret, or comment on the news before
passing it on. In the technology of oral communication, anybody could
insert themselves into the stream of news. Oral communication disperses
communicative power, letting lots of people have access over it, for good or

## ill. Oral communication is deeply decentralized .

Now consider the printing press. It is a technology that centralized power
over communication. Because it was expensive and relatively rare, the
printing press tended to concentrate the power of communication in those
wealthy enough to own one—governments, corporations, and wealthy
individuals. And a printing press created a clear distinction between the
“official” word of the press and everybody else’s words—because of the
basic look and feel of printed information. Even if I crossed out parts of a
newspaper and wrote notes in the margins, my additions would be
handwritten. Annotations by ordinary people look like second-class bits of
information.
The printing press created an informational hierarchy. It drew constant
attention to the difference between “official” and “unofficial” sources, and
then concentrated the power to produce official news in a very small
number of actors—in whoever owned the physical press.
Was this good or terrible? There’s no easy answer to that. The printing
press centralized the power of informational authority. This was a profound
change to the structure of the social world, which enabled all kinds of uses
and abuses. Centralized communication makes it easier for good-hearted
authorities to control the spread of medical misinformation and to spread

## Página 153

the view of trustworthy scientific experts. Centralized communication also
makes it easy for corrupt authorities to spread mass propaganda.
The history of communication technologies involves massive swings
between centralized and decentralized technologies. The technology of ham
radio, as we found it in the early twentieth century, tended toward
decentralization. These radios were small, cheap, and easy to build. Then
the technology of broadcast radio, as it existed in the 1940s, pushed us back
toward moderate centralization; radio towers are much more expensive than
amateur radios. Then came the technology of broadcast television, which, in
the 1960s, involved limited bandwidth and incredibly expensive
transmitters and production costs, so it tended to concentrate
communicative power in a very small handful of broadcast networks.
And things have changed yet again in a way that defies easy
categorization. The technology of the internet—and of social media—
appears, on its surface, to be deeply decentralized. Anybody can get an
account on social media, or start a website, and start pumping out content.
But as the social media scholar Zeynep Tufekci points out, the appearance
of decentralization is partly an illusion. Social media lets almost anybody
produce content, but it also passes all those content producers through a
massively centralized focal point: the search algorithm. Anybody can have a
website and post anything they want for a couple of bucks—but if you
1
appear far down on the search algorithm, on the thousandth page of search
results, nobody will read you. So the internet and social media does
something very funky to communication. It decentralizes content
production. But it also forces everybody to access that content through a
small number of search algorithms—which represent a massive
centralization of attention. Now anybody can speak, but we collectively
hear only a handful of them.
SOME MIGHT BALK AT THE CLAIM THAT TECHNOLOGIES RESHAPE the world.
Some think that technologies are just neutral tools. This is the value-neutral
theory of technology. According to this view, technologies may make
humans more powerful, but a technology has no values, no politics, no
interests of its own. It’s just a power magnifier that amplifies the interests
and values of its users. This is the “Guns don’t kill people, people kill
people” view of technology. Technology doesn’t reshape society, people do.

## Página 154

But many philosophers and scholars of technology reject this value-
2
neutral theory. The philosopher Langdon Winner argues that every
technology has an inherent politics. Each technology pushes society in a
particular political direction, and these effects are often independent of the
intentions of its inventors or users. Maybe the inventors of the printing
press wanted to empower democracy and spread education; maybe they
didn’t want to concentrate communicative power in the hands of a few
authorities. But the technology that they actually invented was a big,
expensive, powerful thing. No matter what message they wanted to send
with the printing press, there was another effect underneath: a force that
tended to centralize the power of official speech and centralize trust.
Winner gives us a particularly fascinating discussion of the politics of
factories. We’re talking about the technique of mass production by using an
assembly line, in which different parts of the line each specialize in a
different, specific task. While the factory is far more efficient at producing
goods quickly and cheaply, Winner says it also encourages a particular kind
of government.
Think about what production was like before factories. Imagine a village
of cobblers—artisans who individually make whole shoes, from beginning
to end. Artisanal shoe production tends to support a world of highly
variable, customized objects. Each shoe producer can make what they want
to, changing their styles and sizes as their taste and mood dictates. And
buyers can easily have shoes made to their exact specifications and
preferences, in the style and color they want, fitted to their particular foot.
But artisanal production is also very slow.
Now replace all these individual, whimsical artisans with a factory. Shut
down their shops, and then hire them back as workers on the factory line.
The changes are enormous. Factories work by breaking up a task into
elements and getting workers to specialize. In the case of a shoe factory,
instead of making an entire shoe from scratch, one worker punches the
holes for the laces, another makes little metal rings to go in the holes, and
another worker puts the rings in the holes to form the eyelets.
This form of specialization enables a massive increase in production
efficiency. But it also requires coordination. The worker punching the holes
and the worker making the rings have to make their parts match. So they
need to standardize a hole size and a ring size. The more we standardize the
procedure, the more efficiently we will produce shoes.

## Página 155

But in order to get these gains in efficiency, we have to prevent workers
from following their own creative fancies. Factories, says Winner, require a
central authority to enforce a single set of standards and keep everybody in
line with those standards. So factories offer a trade-off: If you manage to
have a centralized authority, capable of enforcing standards and conformity
with the factory, you get enormous gains in efficiency and productivity.
This doesn’t necessarily mean you need a tyrannical despot—that
centralized authority could be democratic. But you still need the kind of
democracy that can settle on one set of standards and then enforce them
with the factory workers.
So factories, says Winner, push societies in the direction of centralized
authority and control. But they don’t do it in quite the same way as the
printing press. Factories don’t create centralized authority. Rather, they need
centralized authority in order to function. So the technology of factories
rewards those societies willing to build and maintain a centralized authority
with more economic power.
Let me add to Winner’s story. I think the technology of the factory also
exerts pressure in the kinds of things we tend to care about as a society.
They push us to care more about outcomes than about processes . They
encourage a world that prefers precise outcomes to dynamic and shifting
and improvisational processes.
Suppose an artisanal cobbler wants to build a shoe in some new and
different way. Perhaps they want to indulge their curiosity and try to build a
footbed out of cork instead of the traditional leather. This affects nobody
except the cobbler and their customers. And if their new cork footbed
doesn’t end up having the same shape as the old leather one, that artisan can
adapt the rest of their shoemaking process to fit. Because the work is
dynamic and improvisatory, they can adjust on the fly, and then fill in each
next step based on what happened with the previous one.
But that won’t work in a factory. An efficient factory depends on
standardizing work, because later steps in the process depend on precise
results from earlier steps. The factory is fast, but fragile. If the worker who
makes the footbeds doesn’t make enough, then they screw up all the
production down the line. If they experiment with a new form of footbed
without coordinating with everybody else ahead of time, then it won’t slot
into the other pieces that have already been made.

## Página 156

This changes the relative cost of indulging workers’ quirks and personal
whims. If I were the leader of a loose band of artisanal shoemakers, I could
let them experiment. At worst they would fail at their own project; they
wouldn’t drag anybody else down with them. But I couldn’t do that if I ran
a factory. The inner procedures of a factory are tightly interdependent, with
very little tolerance for variation. So factory overseers must care deeply
about getting precise outcomes. They need to make sure the right number,
made exactly according to specifications, is getting made at every point on
the line.
Factories can, in fact, innovate, but the decision to do so has to come
through some kind of centralized authority. What this looks like is probably
a highly creative small group of people in research and development,
pushing their designs out to the production line, which will execute their
plans—which is very different from a village full of independent artisans. In
the factory, creativity is also centralized.
To sum up: Factories get their gains through tightly woven
interoperation . This requires strict mechanical, standardized rules for
creation and deployment—so all the pieces fit. Factories are a technology
that offers a clear reward to those communities willing to abandon their
quirky, individualized artisanal processes and agree to conform to a
standardized set of rules. This brings with it an entire mindset of focusing
on precise countable outcomes. Factories are a technology that shifts the
world toward centralized authority, rigid controls, and precise countable
outcomes. This is the politics of the factory. And if we live in the time of the
factory, we might forget that things could be otherwise. But this sort of
central standardizing authority is not the only way to arrange the world. It is
a very specific and relatively new way of living, ushered in through a
specific set of technologies.
Let’s take Winner’s analysis of the factory for a walk back over to
metrics. Because metrics are a way of standardizing evaluation and
standardizing values. Games use mechanical values, but there is no pressure
to force all those varied scoring systems into one standard. But metrics tend
toward standardization.
Metrics are factories for values.
You can think of it this way: Games and metrics both use scoring
systems, which are engines of convergence. But the world of games is one
of divergent convergence of a million different scoring systems shaping

## Página 157

different kinds of play, for a million different reasons. The world of metrics,
on the other hand, is one of monolithic convergence , trying to bring
everybody into a singular way of evaluating the world. The crucial feature
of metrics, then, is not just their mechanical nature, but that they are
deployed in a rigid, large-scale infrastructure of meaning.
Games are little detached worlds. Every game does provide a singular
verdict, but there are many different games, with many independent scoring
systems. There is no pressure to coordinate the verdicts between games.
Games do not need to standardize meaning, but metrics do.

## Página 158