# 10. Scoring Systems Change the Subject

## CHAPTER 10

Scoring Systems Change the Subject
oga was incredible, at first. The first couple of years of yoga
changed my basic relationship to my body. Before that, I’d mostly
Y ignored my physical self and lived through my mind: reading,
playing games. Now I was learning to listen to the quiet signals from my
body. Elise, my first yoga teacher, said that yoga was an act of attention. It
was noticing what kinds of movement made your body comfortable, and
which ones freaked your body out. Yoga tuned up my self-awareness.
The yoga teacher and author Donna Farhi says that in every pose you
have an inner edge and an outer edge. Your outer edge is where you’re
maxed out, at the absolute limit of your flexibility. Your inner edge is much
quieter. It is the place where you first feel any hint of strain. When doing a
yoga pose, she says, most people just slam themselves up against their outer
edge. But that’s where your body tenses up, making it hard to stretch into
new spaces. To find flexibility, she said, you want to go to your inner edge
—to find the tiniest bit of stretch and hang out there until that sensation
1
vanishes. Then you move a bit deeper into the pose and find the new place
your inner edge has moved to—and then you wait again.
Surfing your inner edge takes a different kind of discipline: a discipline
of delicacy. It’s easy to go to your outer edge: You just bend over as hard as
you can, until you can’t move anymore. It takes more effort to notice and be
guided by that faint internal sensation.
After a couple of years, I got more hardcore about yoga. I wanted more
and faster progress. I changed to a particularly aggressive power yoga
studio. And that studio had a hidden scoring system. There was a preset
traditional sequence of yoga poses. The teacher assigned you your own
short sequence, and you showed up to the studio every morning and did

## Página 97

your sequence. If you did it well, the teacher would add another pose. This
was progress. This was leveling up.
To get that next level, you needed to demonstrate “mastery” of all your
poses. What this meant, in the context of my power yoga studio, was that
you had to achieve some very clear external markers of success. You had to
touch your forehead to your shins in a forward fold or clasp your hands
together behind your back in a certain twist. If you made your marks, you’d
get the next pose.
The whole procedure was very motivating. And those crisp demarcations
changed my focus. I started caring where I was in the progression of my
practice. I started pushing hard, trying to make certain poses work that my
body wasn’t ready for. I started throwing myself into poses, lunging hard to
make my head touch my shins. And I started tweaking little spots in my
back, hurling myself into twists.
A lot depends on what counts as getting it right. If you’re motivated by a
sense of success, then what you do depends on what, exactly, counts as
success—on what’s scored. In that yoga studio, what mattered was just
achieving that clear, externally recognizable position. You had to touch the
ground with your forehead in this forward bend or clasp your hands behind
your back in that twist. Imagine a different yoga studio, where I could level
up only if I’d done the pose with good form and sensitivity . My points-
oriented soul would have followed those victory conditions instead and
aimed for good form and sensitivity.
The problem is that subtle inner movement is hard to track for an outside
observer. A really good yoga teacher can judge if you’re doing your poses
with good form and care—if they’re paying a ton of attention. But in my
new studio, there were usually thirty or forty students and one teacher, who
ran the class continuously for four hours every morning. And there was only
so much he could monitor, only so much attention he had to give. So he
mostly looked for the clear, simple signals. This made scoring easier;
everybody could tell when you made your pose. But this scoring system
didn’t care very much about you getting the delicate internal positions right
—the ones that would protect your back and joints. So I started hurling
myself at my limits, aiming at that outer mark—and I kept hurting myself.
Sometimes my knees hurt so badly I couldn’t get up the stairs.
I had been value-captured by the scoring system. And the problem here
wasn’t just that the scoring system came from outside me. Elise had given

## Página 98

me an external set of goals and values, which helped me find my way into
what yoga was really about. The problem was that in my new yoga studio,
I’d been given a scoring system focused on easy-to-recognize signals, at the
expense of care and sensitivity.
Scoring systems aren’t the only way to evaluate ourselves. We can go by
gut, by feel, by intuition, by vibes. But none of that stuff is a scoring
system. Scoring systems are a specific kind of social technology. They are
designed to get us all to agree on the score. They get us to reach the same
judgment; they engineer convergence. And to do that, scoring systems need
to transform the whole process of evaluation. Convergence isn’t free.
Scoring systems need to systematically change what we target, in order to
make agreement easy.
Scoring systems are incredibly powerful precisely because they can align
the judgments of vast numbers of different people. They aren’t just for
games. They are the engine at the heart of the modern world. They occupy a
central role in bureaucracy, because bureaucracies need different people to
accept each other’s work—to coordinate around the same shared
conclusions about success. Scoring systems enable messy people in a messy
world to behave, for a little while, as a tightly coordinated unit. But there is
a price.
To understand that price, we need to look at how scoring systems hook
onto the world. How is it possible to get a mess of people, with their very
different perspectives, intellectual styles, and cares, to automatically agree?
The answer is that scoring systems usually work by changing the subject .
There is a particular kind of thing that makes convergence easy for scoring
systems: They like to score objects and events with mechanical edges :
objects whose boundaries are easy to process with mechanical procedures.
We’re on the track of the second Horseman now, who is a close partner to
Scale. The second Horsman lives in the realm of mechanical rules,
inflexible policies, and clear procedures. What is his offer? What powers
does he promise us, and what sacrifice does he ask?
THE AMOUNT OF ENGINEERED CONVERGENCE VARIES. TAKE games. Some games
have only partial convergence. Fishing has a couple of different ways to
keep score: the number of fish you catch, the weight of the biggest fish, the
length of the biggest fish. Within each scoring sub-method, there’s a

## Página 99

singular verdict, but there’s no mechanical system that combines these
separate scores into a single overall verdict. On a day of fishing, I might
catch more fish, and you might catch the biggest fish—but there is no final,
official decision about who did the best at fishing. There is no system that
automatically computes the relative value of weight versus number.
Everyday, informal fishing gives you some degrees of freedom about the
terms by which you will ultimately evaluate yourself.
But in more formal settings, we eradicate that freedom of judgment. We
lock everybody into the same judgment procedure. In a bass fishing
tournament, there’s an official rule about how we sum up the various
measures into a single score. In some tournaments, your score is the
combined weight of your three heaviest fish. And it’s clear why we need
such a convergence: Tournaments are designed to offer singular verdicts
about who won, which are often connected to various cash prizes.
Here’s the key: Scoring systems don’t just discover a convergence that
was already there. They produce convergence. Like courts of law, they take
messy, complex situations and produce singular clear judgments—which
we put into the official record, so that we can all move on with the matter
publicly settled.
People naturally tend to diverge and disagree. So scoring systems need a
procedure to create that single official verdict. Sometimes the procedure is
that we agree on who the official judges will be and promise to accept their
judgment. This is what happens at, say, a short-story competition. We pick a
few expert judges and agree to abide by their judgments, even if we don’t
agree in our hearts. But often, we do something even more strict. We
eliminate the space for fuzz. We set clear targets that leave no room for
disagreement at any step. We find procedures that allow us to evaluate
success mechanically .
Think about the scoring rule for the total weight of your three heaviest
fish. This is mechanical at every step. There’s no question about how to
choose the fish, measure them, or combine them. Anybody could execute
those steps, or inspect them, and come to the same conclusion. We don’t
need to trust a judge. The mechanicity of the steps eliminates disagreement
about the procedure. Unlike with figure skating, there’s no room left for
your own private opinion. Mechanical scoring systems foreclose the
possibility of disagreement .

## Página 100

Imagine a totally different kind of fishing competition: a beautiful-fish
competition, where the goal is to catch the three most beautiful fish. To
figure out who won, just take the three most beautiful fish you caught and
add up their beauty. Put that way, it sounds ridiculous. Beauty doesn’t work
that way. Not everything in the world naturally comes in a form that you
can automatically sum up.
But perhaps we could translate beauty into a form that we could add up.
Let’s say we kill our fish, have them mounted, and then put them up for sale
on eBay. Now we have transformed their beauty into numbers, which we
can add up easily to produce a beauty score. But what we’ve proposed, in
fact, is adding a scoring system. We’ve offered a procedure in which we do
some additional work, which takes something fuzzy and non-computable—
fish beauty—and turns it into hard numbers that are easy to add up.
But this is a transformation, and it isn’t perfect. The price you can get for
something on eBay isn’t a full indicator of its value. We’ve managed to
quantify the beauty of the fish by introducing a particular assessment
method: seeing what a stranger would pay for them in an online shop. But
the quick estimate of online shoppers doesn’t see everything there is to see
about the value of a thing, especially when that value is subtle.
My spouse’s grandparents spent three decades carefully building the
strangest, most wonderful house in the suburbs of San Diego. Her
grandfather was a retired naval engineer; he made a lot of the furniture
himself, building bookcases and cabinets into the walls. Her grandparents
were these gorgeously weird people, with their own peculiar and rambling
sense of humor. And they built their sense of humor into their house. There
were secret doors, hidden rooms. I remember, after we’d spent a full day
camped out in their guest room, my spouse opened up one of the closet
doors to reveal a secret entrance to a tunnel, which led to a hidden craft
room.
Her grandparents had also carefully and lovingly built, in their modest
suburban backyard, this extraordinarily dense garden. They’d spent years
tuning the mix of trees and shrubs and vegetable beds into ecological
harmony, where all the plants worked together. Tall trees would shade short
bushes; short bushes would keep down erosion; one plant would take
nitrogen from the soil and another would put nitrogen back in. Their garden
yielded a shocking amount of delicious food from that little space. The term
for this kind of thing, among a certain sect of hardcore gardeners, is a “food

## Página 101

forest”—a concentrated and interconnected web of highly diverse plants,
supporting each other like a natural ecosystem.
When her grandparents died, I went with my spouse to clean that house
and pack up a few mementos that she wanted to keep. And then, because
nobody in the family still lived in San Diego, they decided to sell it to some
house flippers.
The flippers took the house apart. They removed all the weird old stuff.
They took out her grandfather’s handmade bookcases and replaced them
with Ikea furniture. They removed all the secret doors and hidden tunnels.
And they leveled the food forest, cutting down all the trees and shrubs and
networks of vegetables, and replaced it with concrete and an ordinary grass
lawn.
It was a fucking tragedy, but a completely predictable one. Because the
food forest and the hidden tunnels were weird . They had value to a very
specific kind of person, with a distinct sensibility. And maintaining the food
forest required a deep knowledge of gardening and a willingness to learn
about the specific microclimate of the area. The value wasn’t obvious; it
wasn’t readily transferrable. To the right person, that house would have
been incredibly valuable. But that’s not how the housing market works, and
it’s not something that house flippers can deal with. The flippers’ business
model involved moving the house quickly, which meant finding a buyer
quickly, which meant removing any odd or subtly valuable features and
changing them out for the kind of features that anybody could value.
You might think there’s an easy, neutral way to compare the values of
things: Just put them on the market and see what price they bring. But that
method is not neutral. It tends to prefer things with highly accessible value.
And when we use that method intensively, we’ll start to see the world only
in terms of those easy values.
This is the central idea of part three. We’re going to focus on a common
and deeply transformative type of scoring system: the mechanical scoring
system. We’re going to discover how scoring systems systematically change
the subject. And we’re going to ask: Why do we let it happen? What use do
we get out of submitting to the strictness of mechanical scoring systems?
And we’re going to try to get a fuller answer to our central question: Why
do mechanical scoring systems have such different effects? And can we
learn from games how to use scoring systems without being limited by
them?

## Página 102