# 1. Is This the Game You Really Want to Be Playing?

## CHAPTER 1

Is This the Game You Really Want to Be Playing?
ock climbing saved me.
I was in a miserable season of my life—staying up late every
R night, trying to dredge more work out of myself. I was anxious,
consumed with self-loathing. I needed something to change.
A friend suggested that I try rock climbing, that it was a “technical
balance sport” for people who loved solving puzzles. This seemed utterly
ridiculous to me. Rock climbing was for thrill-seeking adventure bros. Rock
climbing was muscling your way up a wall while you rage-screamed. And I
was a clumsy nerd.
It took me about half an hour in my university’s ratty little climbing gym
to see that I’d been completely wrong.
I’d been failing, over and over again, on one specific move. I was
supposed to reach over to a hold way up left; every time I’d go for it, I’d
lose my balance and fall. I was ready to give up; I was just too weak. But
then another climber explained the proper technique: I could kick out my
leg all the way to the right, as a counterbalance, and then the rest of my
body would just float up to the left, to the next hold. It felt amazing; my
whole body was suddenly a fluid, coordinated thing. I felt, maybe for the
first time in my life, like I was moving elegantly.
My friend was right, it turns out. Climbing isn’t just about adrenaline and
brawn. It’s problem-solving. It’s staring down a set of impossibly tiny holds
and inventing intricate sequences of careful movements to make it through.
Climbing is solving physics puzzles with your body, in the alphabet of
yoga.
I’ve played games my whole life. Games offer me the joy of complete
absorption in performing one clear task in a precise, well-defined world.

## Página 10

They banish the nauseating complexity of ordinary life. They give me the
refuge of clear rules and clear goals. In their restrictions, there is freedom.
Up until that point, I’d only played mental games: chess, poker, computer
strategy games. I hated my body, which was a sludgy and uncooperative
thing. But climbing asked me to devote the whole of my attention to the
precise relationship between my body and the rock. Sometimes a climb
would demand that I carefully balance myself on my tippy-toes on a tiny
dime’s edge of rock, and then carefully ease my center of gravity over.
Sometimes a climb asked me to drive myself up with an explosive twist of
my hips. Climbing demanded a deep understanding of how the parts of my
body connected, of how a movement flowed through me.
I met Sherwood at that ratty university climbing gym. He was a
beautifully perverse climber. He loved nothing more than to get stuck in
some awful, contorted position on the rock—one leg over his shoulder, the
other leg trapped under an elbow. He’d groan and curse, rocking back and
forth in a tangle—and then suddenly find a way through in an ecstatic burst
of motion. He had cultivated a climbing style that gave him precisely his
desired ratio of joy to masochism.
We were climbing in Joshua Tree National Park one weekend—climbing
real rock, working on tricky, delicate problems. I’d been climbing for a
couple of years by then, and I was trying to break through to the next level.
Every established rock climb has a difficulty grade attached—a rating
derived from community consensus. For the dominant rock-climbing
culture, this difficulty rating basically serves as a scoring system. Your
primary score is the difficulty rating of the hardest climbs you can do. The
climb I was trying was the next level up of difficulty from anything I’d
climbed before. I wanted that next number so badly; I wanted that level-up.
And the more desperately I wanted it, the grosser my climbing got.
Sherwood saw my desperate flailing, shook his head, and said, “Man, you
gotta just savor the movement.”
We were climbing for different reasons. I wanted to get to the top any
way I could—anything that would count as a victory, that would give me
that next number. Sherwood would climb a route, get to the top, frown, and
mutter, “Well, OK, but that was pretty ugly,” and then keep climbing it over
and over again until the movement felt beautiful to him. His comment—that
I had to savor the movement—got stuck in my head over the next few
months. It changed my whole relationship to climbing. I started to pay more

## Página 11

attention to the sweet joy of the movement—to lavish loving attention on
the microscopic adjustments, the explosive hip twists. At night, I would
dream about how it felt .
A lot of the time, we don’t know the real reason we’re doing something. I
had been telling myself that climbing was making me fitter, and that I was
learning some skills. But in retrospect, what I actually loved was how it felt
to be climbing. It was an experience of my own grace, a rare taste of
loveliness flowing through my bones and fingers. And it was the fact that
my life suddenly had rowdy road trips and drunk bonfires in it. I came back
from climbing weekends cheerful, refreshed. Climbing made me feel
complete.
And here’s the strangest thing: What I truly loved was a feeling, a loving
involvement with the difficulty of the physical world, that went far beyond
the simple goals of climbing. But I also couldn’t have found that feeling
without that scoring system. The game of climbing has a very specific
definition of success: You have succeeded if you get to the top. And the
scoring system also tells you, over the course of a climbing life, that you
should be trying to climb ever-more difficult climbs. This gave me a focus.
It shaped a very specific kind of activity; without that goal, I would never
have paid enough attention to my body, never would have refined my
movement enough, to discover a pure joy in movement.
Given just a rock wall, there’s no particular reason for a modern, tool-
using human to try to move up a particular line of tiny holds using nothing
but their hands and feet. But climbing is a game that tells you what to do; it
forces you to take one hard pathway up the rock, and it tells you that it will
count as a success only if you follow the rules—if you climb the rock using
only your hands and feet on the rock itself. And it tells you to keep trying
harder and harder climbs.
This structure forced me to tune in to how I was moving. It keyed me
into a new form of beauty. It gave me a richer form of freedom than I had
anywhere else in my life. It showed me the way to a new kind of agency.
I’M A PHILOSOPHY PROFESSOR NOW. THERE IS, IN MY PROFESSION , a single list of
all the major philosophy departments, ranked by prestige. There is another
list of all the philosophy journals you could publish in, also ranked by
prestige. These are the scoring systems of philosophy.

## Página 12

Nobody is forcing people to use these systems. They’re just a pair of
websites, each compiled by a small group of professionals, based on some
annual surveys. In the end, they’re just a summary of a few people’s
subjective impressions of status. We could have just as well decided to
ignore them; they have no official authority. But that’s not what happened.
Most professional philosophers pay intense, close, and regular attention to
these lists. Most of us know exactly how we’re doing on the rankings.
I didn’t care about those rankings when I first fell in love with
philosophy. I didn’t even know about them. I got into the field because I
was obsessed with some big, weird old questions. I wanted to understand
the meaning of life, and where it came from. I wanted to know if there was
any kind of objective morality. I wanted to know if beauty was real, if art
actually mattered, or if it was all just a con. And I wanted to know why we
trusted ourselves—our ability to reason, our moral instincts.
I loved the conversations I was having with other people, trying to figure
these things out: late nights out with other philosophy majors, gleefully
shouting at each other and scribbling logic diagrams on napkins. My
parents wanted me to be a doctor or a lawyer or a programmer, something
real. But I couldn’t give up on these huge questions. My parents thought I
was throwing away my chance at a safe and productive career.
I went to graduate school in philosophy precisely because I loved those
wild, unmanageable questions. Then the stupidest thing happened. I met
those rankings and they got under my skin. But the questions I loved
weren’t what got you into those highly ranked journals and departments. If
you wanted to do well on the rankings, you had to write small, precise
articles on fairly arcane technical questions. So, over the years, I stopped
chasing the questions I cared about. I spent all my energy trying to climb
those rankings. And all my joy in philosophy started draining away.
I don’t think I would have cared nearly so much about status without the
brutal clarity of the rankings. Before the rankings, I certainly wanted some
respect, but only from very specific people: the particular philosophers I
thought were cool. Before the rankings, my desires were grounded in my
own sense of what mattered. But that wasn’t what was in the rankings. The
rankings represent the summarized views of other people—people who had
been designated as supposed authorities by some other supposed
authorities. I didn’t actually trust anybody involved with the ranking
process. But the fact that all their opinions had been aggregated into a

## Página 13

single, clear ranking—a ranking that everybody knew about—made them
powerful. The rankings compressed a mess of human opinions into a single
neat score. That clarity sucked me into caring about something I’d never
cared about before: the average respect of the whole profession.
The political philosopher Thomas Hobbes thought what ultimately
mattered in politics was power. The rightful ruler is whoever has the power
to control other people’s actions. But for Hobbes, the true source of power
wasn’t strength or military might. He believed that ultimate power comes
from the ability to control language and define terms— especially the terms
of success. The power over definitions is stronger than military or economic
1
power. Because if you can define what good and evil mean for people, if
you can control what success and failure mean for them, then you can
control them from the inside.
GAMES WAKE US UP TO A LIFE OF PLAY; METRICS DRIVE US DOWN into grueling
optimization. And sometimes, we let some external, institutional systems—
rankings, metrics, and measures—set our desires and goals. Let’s give this
2
phenomenon a name. Call it value capture . Value capture happens when:

## 1. Your values are rich and subtle—or developing that way.

## 2. You enter some social (typically institutional) setting that offers you

simplified, often quantified renditions of your values.

## 3. The simplified versions take over.

If you want a portable version, try this: Value capture occurs when you
get your values from some external source and let them rule you without
adapting them .
Value capture happens when a restaurant stops caring about making good
food and starts caring about maximizing its Yelp ratings. It happens when
students stop caring about education and start caring about their GPA. It
happens when scientists stop caring about finding truth and start caring
about getting the biggest grants. It even happens in religion. A pastor
recently told me that his church had become completely obsessed with
baptism rates. The higher-ups had established an internal leaderboard in
which the pastors competed on monthly baptism rates, and it was starting to

## Página 14

dominate everybody’s attention. He’d found himself caring less about the
long-term spiritual development of his flock and focusing more on trying to
deliver popular sermons that would up his baptism rates and move him up
that leaderboard.
In value capture, you’re outsourcing your values to an institution. Instead
of setting your values in the light of your own particular experiences,
instead of adjusting them to your particular personality, you’re letting
distant bureaucratic forces set them for you.
Maybe this wouldn’t matter if the institutional metrics got it exactly right
—if they truly captured what is valuable in the world. But that almost never
happens. Metrics are shaped by institutional forces. They are subject to
demands for fast, efficient data collection at scale, to demands of fitting into
spreadsheets and action reports. Institutional metrics are part of a system
that abstracts away from personal difference and local detail and identifies
some thin, measurable detail. And what’s easily measurable is rarely the
same as what’s really valuable .
AFTER A FEW YEARS OF SOUL-SEARCHING, I FINALLY MANAGED to shake off the
grip of the philosophy rankings and remember my love for those weird old
questions. But a couple of years later, it happened to me all over again. I
went on Twitter.
I got on originally to talk to people, and to learn from them. There was a
brief moment, years ago, when Twitter seemed genuinely magical. You
could make friends you would never have found in any other place, find
ideas and conversations that would have been impossible otherwise. Twitter
was, for a little while, a bonanza of surprising but meaningful connection.
But then I went minorly viral a few times and caught that delicious,
feverish high of seeing my numbers soar. And every time, I’d be gripped
with the need for more. I started ransacking my thoughts, imagining how
each one would look on Twitter. It started to matter less for me whether the
thing was true or deep or wise. I just wanted thoughts that were peppy and
sharp and quick enough to blow up.
It’s particularly easy, with Twitter, to see the exact contours of the value
shift. The platform’s scoring system—its Likes and Retweets and Follows
—doesn’t register empathy, or understanding, or finding out something that
really transforms you down the line. It measures quick-fire popularity.

## Página 15

Twitter’s metrics don’t capture the difference between somebody who
chuckled for a second at your tweet and somebody who was shaken to their
core. If they both just click Like, then Twitter counts them the same.
Twitter captures a binary information state. It does not record the
difference between loving something, being mildly amused by it, or having
it change your life. It flattens complex information into a single binary bit
of data. And it captures that data at one narrow moment: the moment of first
reading. You encounter a deep tweet. At first you don’t like it; you disagree
with it. But it sticks in your craw; it gnaws at you. Slowly, it changes your
mind—but that takes a week. The value of that tweet comes in a slow burn.
But it’s pretty unlikely that you’ll go back and find that tweet to Like it. The
interface of social media tends to capture positive reactions in the first
moment of exposure. One of the central reasons we communicate with each
other is to learn, to be challenged, to have our understanding transformed,
3
which takes time. But that kind of communication isn’t valued by
Twitter’s scoring system.
Call this the Gap . The Gap is the distance between what’s being
measured and what actually matters.
REINER KNIZIA IS SOMETIMES CALLED THE MOZART OF GERMAN game design—
the bizarre prodigy who effortlessly churns out these elegant, profoundly
original game designs. As the German and larger European board-game
scene was heating up in the 1980s and ’90s, Knizia was sitting on top of it
all, spewing forth hundreds of new games.
4
In a lecture on his game design process, Knizia said that the most
important tool in his game design toolbox was the scoring system, because
it sets the player’s motivations in the game. Scores tell the players what
they’ll want during the game. And this is the heart of how game designers
shape our actions—and how those actions will feel—in the game. A scoring
system specifies motivations for the player to adopt.
You can make a game out of the simplest things: a few rules and a goal.
One of the more elegant modern game designs is The Mind . The game is
comically simple. There’s a deck with a hundred cards in it, numbered from
1 to 100. For level one, you shuffle the deck and deal each player one
random card. The goal is for all players to work together as a team to play
the cards in order, from lowest to highest. But there is one single, glorious

## Página 16

catch: You’re not allowed to communicate. You can’t talk, signal, grunt, or
gesture to each other. You have to coordinate wordlessly to play those cards
in order. If you can do it for level one, you go up to level two: Reshuffle the
deck, and deal two random cards to each person. For a four-player game,
you win the game if you can beat level eight—that’s eight random cards
dealt to each person, to be played out in perfect order, in total silence.
The game asks you to do the seemingly impossible: to be telepathic. And
then it teaches you how that’s actually possible. You play the game by
developing a shared sense of timing for how long you should wait to play a
given card. And you can get very good at it together. Your group can play
these wild, precise sequences in lockstep tempo. It will start to feel like you
can touch the inside of each other’s brains and hear a collective clock
ticking.
How does The Mind accomplish this little miracle? What’s it made out
of? There are two basic parts to the game. First it gives you restrictions :
The game strips away all your normal avenues for communication. Then it
gives you a goal . It tells you to play these cards in sequential order. Out of
these simplest of pieces, the game shapes a very specific set of actions and
challenges—and through those, it shapes a mental state.
This is the peculiarity at the heart of games: They tell you what to desire.
And we players are fluid enough that we can let those scoring systems
shape our desires. We can slip into alternate motivational states like a new
set of clothes. We have the ability to start a game, find out what will get us
points, and then—for a period of time—care intensely, exactly as we’re told
to.
It’s not just that a game tells you what counts as winning for this game. It
sets the deeper meaning of winning. A game can tell you whether you’re
selfish or part of a larger collective. Start up The Mind . The game tells you
you’re all on a team together, and you win or lose as one. Now your desires
are unified; you are a perfect coordinated unit. Start up another game, like
the classic first-person shooter Quake III Arena . This video game throws
you into an online arena, where you score points by killing other players.
Now you are an unapologetic psychopath, a being of pure selfishness,
dodging, whirling, bouncing grenades down the hall, head-shotting people
as they come down the corner.
Start up another game: Go outside and play a game of pickup basketball.
Now you’re divided into teams, and the basic shape of your cares shifts to

## Página 17

match. It doesn’t matter that Tessa is your best friend; she’s on the opposite
team now, and your job is to steal her passes and block her shots. It doesn’t
matter that in ordinary life you hate Sam. He’s on your team now, and if
he’s open, you pass him the damn ball. Because for a period, your goals and
Sam’s goals are aligned.
Games play around with who you are, what you care about, and the basic
shape of your relationships to other people. Games reach into you and give
you a new form of agency, and you can, for a while, become completely
absorbed in that new agency. And what enables that, in crucial part, is the
clarity, the simplicity, and the unambiguity of the scoring system. Games let
somebody else design a new self for you, for you to slip into.
PERHAPS THIS SEEMS UNNERVING, LETTING ANOTHER HUMAN being inside our
heads to tinker with our goals. But this goal manipulation can be relatively
safe in games. Because often in games, the goal isn’t what really matters.
We adopt the goal in order to experience the process . The beauty is in the
struggle.
This is a very specific kind of orientation. Let’s give it a name: striving
play . In striving play, you try to win not because winning is important, but
because the act of trying to win gives you a delicious struggle. In striving
play, you don’t really care about winning in a lasting way. You temporarily
induce in yourself a desire to win, so you can enjoy the process of trying.
Striving play involves a motivational inversion of ordinary, practical life.
In normal life, we struggle in order to attain some goal that we really want.
In striving play, we adopt a goal in order to have the struggle that we really
want.
This may seem bizarre, but striving play is perfectly ordinary. Your
friends come over, and you decide to play a silly party game, like charades.
There is a paradox at the heart of charades. Most people play the game, not
to win, but to break the ice and get goofy. But when you play charades, you
have to actually try to win to have fun. A game like charades is fun only
when you’re moderately invested—when you’re genuinely trying to
communicate some silly little phrase through gestures, when you’re truly
frustrated that people aren’t getting it. Getting emotionally invested in
winning charges the whole experience, and gives it spice.

## Página 18

But most of us don’t actually care about winning charades. If you lost but
everybody had lots of fun, you probably wouldn’t feel disappointed.
Because deep in your heart, you already know that winning isn’t the point.
Having fun is.
THE STANDARD SCORING SYSTEM OF CLIMBING WAS GOOD FOR me, for the first
few years. It made me stronger and more graceful than I’d ever been. But
over time, it stopped working. I’m not naturally very athletic, and I didn’t
have the time to train hard. The standard scoring system said there was one
goal: Climb more difficult climbs. After a while, I got stuck. The difficulty
game just had me throwing myself against gruelingly difficult climbs, and
mostly failing. The whole thing turned tedious. It took me a while to
remember that I had never really cared about being a great rock climber. I
loved rock climbing because it showed me the beauty in my own moving
body. I loved it when it changed my experience of the natural world—when
it sensitized me to microscopic details in the rock and the landscape.
I eventually found a way to love rock climbing again by tweaking the
goals. I stopped being laser-focused on pure difficulty. I looked for
middlingly hard but interesting climbs, which pushed me into new kinds of
movement. And I didn’t declare myself finished with a particular climb
after the first time I climbed it. I took the Sherwood path. I aimed for
smoothness, flow, and total mastery of the climb. What I most wanted was
the feeling of complete organized attunement—and I got that from seeking
elegant mastery over moderate climbs, and not from the perpetual quest for
more difficult climbs.
In other words, I was turning into a game designer, by creating my own
personal version of the game. I was starting to play around with what
counted as winning. I was starting to tune the game to my own purposes, to
give me that specific mental state of ecstatic organization and flow.
Games tell you what to desire, through the scoring system. But you can
also take charge of which games you play, and choose which scoring
systems you adopt. You can tweak your games, shift to new ones, jump
from ordinary Super Mario Odyssey to speedrunning it. Or you can quit
Mario entirely and learn archery, or start a Dungeons & Dragons campaign.
You can use games to explore different ways of thinking and caring. You
can become a planning, optimizing, resource-maximizing being. You can

## Página 19

become a goofy gesticulating charades being. You can become a twitchy
being of reflexes, dodging and whirling and sniping with angelic grace. You
can merge yourself into a telepathic group mind.
In a game, you can plunge into an alternate self. And scoring systems are
at the center. They make it easier for us to change what we target and what
we care about. Scoring systems are an instruction manual for new values.
ONCE, A FEW YEARS BEFORE THE RISE OF CHATGPT, I WAS IN A room with a bunch
of computer scientists who were working on building a creative artificial
intelligence—an AI that could make good art. I asked, “So what target data
are you using? What counts as success when training the AI?”
One team explained that they were using the Netflix database about
engagement hours. Their AI was “successful” when its output most
resembled the Netflix shows that got viewers to watch the most hours of
TV. The problem is that engagement hours are not the same as good art. Art
can be good in so many ways. It can move us; it can make us more sensitive
and empathic; it can enrich our understanding of one another. But none of
those qualities are necessarily measured by engagement hours.
I said all this. I said that they were training their AI not to make good art,
but to make addictive shows. They were optimizing for total engagement
hours, and not for the quality of those hours. The AI wranglers responded,
“Well, that’s the dataset we have. Show us a better dataset for good art and
we’ll optimize for that instead.”
And that’s the core problem: We don’t have a massive dataset for good
art, but we do have a massive dataset for engagement hours. And this is no
accident. Some kinds of things are systematically harder to measure
because they are more variable, more personal, or more delicate. This is
what a lot of this book will be about: why so many of the important things
in life seem to consistently defy measurement. They vanish from sight when
we insist on using the measurement tools of large-scale institutions and
bureaucracy. What’s meaningful is intimate and unpredictable; it eludes
easy classification. If we let institutional metrics set our values and drive
our lives, we end up chasing what’s easy to count, and not what’s really
important.
When we play games—when we are in charge of them—we are touring a
whole ecosystem of deeply different rules and scoring systems, choosing

## Página 20

and tweaking them to fit our own purposes. But our relationship to metrics
is different. Our institutional lives are usually ruled by very small number
of pervasive metrics. We have very little power over which ones dominate
our lives, and what they measure. And these metrics have been engineered
not to give us a meaningful life but for the convenience of vast bureaucratic
information systems.
WHY ARE WE SO DRAWN TO SIMPLE SCORING SYSTEMS? SCORING systems offer us
relief from the painful complexity of life. When we leave ourselves fully
exposed to the value density of real life, it’s hard to know what to do. My
own life is full of a hundred conflicting claims and hopes. I want to be a
loving parent, a good teacher, and a thoughtful scholar. I want to write
beautiful things, to help advance the dream of a kinder and more just world.
I want to be a good partner to my spouse. I want to keep my body healthy,
and to get better at climbing. I want to keep in touch with the world of new
music and new comics. And I want to indulge my weird obsessions, like my
current overwhelming desire to perfect my chile verde. All of those things
clamor for my attention.
Suppose we focus down on just one part of life—say, my desire to be a
good parent. Even then, it’s still hard to know how well you’re doing. It’s
late; my kid has been sad all day because he’s frustrated about learning
math, but finally he’s happy because we found a great new anime to watch
together. Now it’s two hours past his bedtime; he’s bouncing off the walls,
shouting about what special powers he wants. He’s inventing his own spin-
off versions of the story, throwing around his stuffed animals into a massive
mess on the floor, and pretending to be Luffy the rubber pirate hero. Am I
being a good parent? An indulgent parent? A parent fostering creativity?
How the hell am I supposed to know?
Our actual values are often unclear; it isn’t obvious how each value
applies to a particular situation. On top of that, real life is full of a
nauseating tangle of different unclear values, which I constantly have to
weigh and decide between. How do I compare the value of spending an
hour reading to my toddler with the value of spending an hour lifting
weights? How do I calculate the relative value of spending this Saturday
morning reading an exciting new sci-fi novel versus hacking away at my

## Página 21

email pile? Life is a jumble of different values, all shouting at each other,
with no clear centralized method for making sense of it all.
But games are different.
Games grant us a precious experience of clarity. It is a clarity of purpose
—a clarity of value. In a game, for once in our lives, we know exactly what
we’re supposed to be doing, and afterward, we know exactly how well we
have done. There are no larger questions about the meaning of our lives, no
existential angst about our goals, no ambiguity. We know what we are
pursuing in explicit, immaculate, unquestionable detail. Games offer value
clarity . They are an existential balm for the confusion of ordinary life.
And games also tell us exactly what everybody else wants. They
coordinate our values and make it easy for us to make sense to each other.
They create a quick, artificial community.
I spend half my life hiding what I really I love. I am a goddamn weirdo
who has spent vats of time chasing bizarre obsessions, all mostly
incomprehensible to the larger world. Our cares are so different; they speak
in different languages of meaning. Climbing speaks to me in the language
of getting stronger, mastering movement, finding solutions. Jazz speaks to
me in the language of thrilling improvisation, of group creativity at speed,
of the beauty of mathematics made sonic. Philosophy speaks to me in the
language of curiosity, connection, and gorgeous ideas. To many other
people, these languages of meaning are completely opaque. And other
people care about different things, with different languages of meaning,
which are unfamiliar and uninterpretable to me.
But games define all that difference away. In most games, there are no
difficult questions about other people’s motives. There are no vast gulfs
between our very different loves. The rules set precisely the same goals for
all of us. They create a shared language of success. Explaining ourselves
becomes effortless. Scoring systems make us entirely comprehensible to
one another. There are now only the simple, practical questions: What are
the most efficient means to achieve that shared, clear goal?
Games offer us social value clarity .
In most games, that clarity is happily artificial. The points are made up.
In most games, the goals are things we invented for the sake of fun or
satisfaction—to shape some delicious form of action. Game goals can be
adopted and then thrown away again. Game cares are temporary and
disposable.

## Página 22

But metrics offer us a different bargain. They promise the same delicious
clarity: that if we adopt some simple scoring system, our values will
become clear and easy to communicate. University rankings, social media
follower counts, page views—each of these promises to simplify the
meaning of success in the world. But the cost is different. Because metrics
are designed to measure something in the world, something real. Maybe it’s
health, education, or well-being. Maybe it’s popularity or status. It’s when
mechanical scoring systems try to capture some real truths that we have to
start worrying about the possibility of error—about the possibility of a
mismatch between the clarity of the score and the density of the real world.
That’s when we are in danger of being seduced away from what’s really
important, by an artificially clarified rendition of value.
I SPENT YEARS CHASING THE PHILOSOPHY RANKINGS, UNTIL IT almost destroyed
my soul. I became a miserable, clenched person—hating what I was
reading, hating what I was writing. And everybody else hated it, too. But in
my quiet hours, I’d started a tiny little side project, on a question that
almost nobody in my profession took seriously: Why do we play games?
The question fascinated me. But it didn’t count as a real question in the
world of official academic philosophy, so I mostly hid it from serious
company, and worked on it in stolen moments.
A few years later, the rankings quest had gotten me to such a point of
misery that I was starting to consider quitting philosophy, giving up my
professor gig, and finding something else to do with my life. Instead, I took
one last shot. I let myself indulge in what seemed, from the standards of my
profession, like the most ludicrous possible quest: to figure out the value of
games. I ended up spending years obsessed with it—trying to articulate the
peculiar beauty of games, the value of play, and how game designers are a
unique kind of artist who use scoring systems to shape our desires and our
actions into something beautiful.
I cared about it because I cared about games. I’ve spent my entire life
playing games of every kind. I played my first computer game at about the
age of ten. My dad went from being a Vietnamese refugee to being a
programmer at Intel in the 1980s. He’d bought us a cast-off Intel computer
at a sale for employees. It was a primitive thing, the size of a refrigerator.
The only place for it was in our garage. I used it to play one of the earliest

## Página 23

computer games: Colossal Cave Adventure , a fully text-based adventure in
which the game gave you written descriptions of what was happening, and
you had to struggle with its primitive text parser to tell it what you wanted
to do. “Go west.” “Get lamp.” “Get water.” “Pour water.”
I grew up as computer games grew up. I played tons of text adventure
games, and then the first adventure games with graphics. I played some of
the first computer role-playing games, where you wandered through endless
dungeons killing monsters and getting experience points. I played other
games, too. I learned chess; I learned poker. I fell in love with go—possibly
the most beautiful of all games, a game of depth and profundity. I also lost
months of my life to the gruelingly addictive strategy computer game
Civilization— possibly the only game I truly regret playing. And later on, I’d
discover the exploding world of European board games. I played
fascinating subtle auction games and resource-management games. I’d stay
up late at night playing board games with my friends, and then afterward
talk for hours analyzing the experience—trying to figure out what made one
game so boringly mechanical and another game so explosively delicious. I
started posting on online forums, reviewing board games, trying to figure
out exactly what made certain games just so vibratingly alive. And then this
somehow merged with my academic career, and I ended up writing an
entire philosophy book about the peculiar magic of games.
But at the same time, I was dealing with metrics. At my first professor
job, I was the “learning outcomes liaison” for my philosophy department.
This meant that I had to gather quantitative data about how our department
was doing in promoting student success, to show that we weren’t all just
bullshitters wasting taxpayer money. And I had to do it in an environment
where student success had become defined by administrators, in a
particularly narrow way. “Student success” had been officially defined as a
weighted average of graduation rate and graduation speed.
This definition captured almost nothing about what I or my fellow
philosophy professors cared about in teaching. But it ruled our lives; it was
the language we had to speak in whenever we wanted to justify a new hire
or a budgetary line item. So I started writing about the philosophy of that,
too: about why metrics are usually formulated in terms that squash
whatever is really important to us; about why metrics so often drain the life
out of what really matters.

## Página 24

And I realized at some point that I had an entire theory about games, in
which clear and simple scoring systems were the magic ingredient that
opened up the door to a whole world of delightful play. And I had an entire
theory about metrics, in which clear and simple scoring systems killed what
really mattered.
I became obsessed with a new question, which seemed for a while to
matter only to me: Why is it that mechanical scoring systems are, in games,
the site of so much joy and fluidity and play? And why, in the realm of
public measures and institutional metrics, do they drain the life out of
everything?
That is the question that led to the book you’re reading now. And the
answer is going to come in two stages, roughly divided into the halves of
this book.
In the first half, we’re going to discover that we can each approach
scoring systems with two very different attitudes. We can approach them
playfully— bending ourselves in and out of them, dancing between them,
changing them, modifying them. Or we can be captured by them—we can
let scoring systems dictate our goals and targets to us, even when those
goals fit poorly with our lives. So at first, it’s going to look a lot like the
difference is a matter of individual attitude. Maybe, you think, the solution
is simple: We should, as individuals, try to have the right attitude, and just
be more playful about everything.
But in the second half, we’re going to discover why the solution isn’t so
easy. Because the world often makes it extremely hard to be playful. The
basic nature of games and their social environment—their quickness, their
disconnection, their disposability—encourages in us the playful attitude and
makes it easy to find and sustain. The nature of metrics discourages
playfulness. They encourage, instead, value capture: a rigid attachment to
an external system of values. We will discover value capture everywhere—
in journalism, education, and business, but also in our food, our hobbies,
and the way we measure our own health and happiness.
Sometimes, metrics pull on us because they are tied to simple incentives:
money, opportunity, status, power. But incentives don’t explain everything.
Often, metrics do give us status and power—but only because everybody
else has gotten sucked in already. Again, philosophers could have ignored
the philosophy rankings; they had no official authority. But we gave them
power, by believing in them.

## Página 25

And most fascinating of all is that so many of us get sucked into public
metrics even when they don’t give us status—even when it hurts us.
Pursuing weight loss into declining health and sorrow; obsessively chasing
more Likes and Follows even when it doesn’t matter for our job. The very
clarity and universal comprehensibility of metrics seduce us into value
capture, even when it makes us miserable.
Metrics are understandable, interconnected, and perfectly transparent.
And in this clarity is a certain kind of trap. We become beholden to what
everybody can understand. Games are isolated, disconnected, and
unimportant. The joy we take in them is often private and opaque to others.
And that opacity gives us the space to be free.
I’M WRITING THIS BOOK BECAUSE OF AN EMAIL FROM A STUDENT . She’d seen one
of my lectures, where I’d talked about the mystery of why games and
metrics hit so differently. I had talked about the two main threads at the
center of the mystery: striving play and value capture. When I gave the
lecture, I didn’t have a good answer yet; I was just fumbling around,
chasing a chaos of connections. But the student wrote me, and said the talk
had pulled her out of a five-year depressive spiral.
She turned out to be a lot like me: an Asian American kid, the child of
immigrants, pushed by her parents to keep a perfect 4.0 GPA and get into
the most highly ranked college. She was also an athlete, a competitive
golfer. And, she said, she’d been struggling with anorexia, obsessed with
her BMI.
She said my talk had made her realize that she’d been trapped in all kinds
of bad games. Life had given her some scoring systems and she’d just been
trying to get as high a score as she could, without wondering if she should
have accepted them into her heart in the first place. Thinking about these
things as games, she said, had helped her get some distance from the
rankings and metrics. She could step back and ask herself if she actually
wanted to accept these systems, if they really mattered to her.
She sent me a picture of her phone. She’d changed the default
background so it gave her a message, a reminder, every time she looked at
it.
Her phone says, “Is this the game you really want to be playing?”

## Página 26