# 6. Transparency Is Surveillance

## CHAPTER 6

Transparency Is Surveillance
hat functions do scoring systems serve in public life?
The full answer will turn out to be incredibly complicated. So
W let’s start with a simpler case study in one particular kind of
scoring system: public transparency metrics . Public transparency metrics
are designed to reduce corruption and bias and increase accountability, by
making the secretive workings of experts visible to the wider public.
Transparency metrics will show us the costs and benefits of measurement
processes designed for extreme accessibility.
Some kinds of transparency aren’t so public. Some are designed so that
experts can monitor other experts—as in scientific transparency, which
involves one set of scientists making their data and calculations available
for other experts to check. Public transparency metrics, on the other hand,
are designed to be comprehensible to nonexperts—the larger public, or their
legislative representatives.
Public transparency usually works by evaluating some group of experts
and measuring their success in easily comprehensible terms. In other words,
these metrics are scoring systems, designed to render a public verdict about
some experts’ efforts. Most important, transparency metrics report some
quality that we, the general public, can easily understand. When my state
legislature demands that my philosophy department justify its existence in
terms of a transparent metric, we can’t just explain how we help students
become more curious and reflective. Those judgments are complex and
opaque; it takes expertise to make them and to check each other’s work. If
we justified ourselves in terms like that, we would be asking the world to
trust our judgment. Transparency metrics work to avoid that opacity. They
offer justification in publicly accessible terms, like graduation rates,
graduation speed, or student satisfaction surveys.

## Página 60

Transparency metrics do genuinely good work. They are powerful tools
for exposing corruption and fighting some kinds of social bias, like racial or
gender bias. They block nepotism and subconscious favoritism. But they
also have a cost, which arises directly from their core function of
accessibility. Transparency undermines expertise.
FOR YEARS, WHENEVER I DID ANY CHARITABLE GIVING, I USED Charity
Navigator, a watchdog organization that checks up on nonprofit
organizations. Charity Navigator promised to give us a look inside the big
charitable organizations, to rate them on their efficiency—to expose lazy,
wasteful charities and reward efficient ones. Its primary output, for the
public, was a single ranked list of charities, scored by efficiency and
effectiveness. This is a public transparency metric, and a scoring system.
Charity Navigator’s efficiency rating initially depended primarily on one
metric: the “overhead ratio” for a charity. The overhead ratio is determined
by looking at how much a nonprofit spends externally, doing good for the
world, versus how much is lost to internal costs. This is supposed to sort
efficient charities from wasteful ones. It looks good, it sounds good, and I
myself used it for years to direct my charitable giving. I even used it in my
introductory ethics classes. I had my students read arguments about whether
there was some obligation to give money to charity. As a grand finale for
the unit, I’d take donations from the class, I’d match their donations, and
then we would discuss the most effective use for that money. I always had
us look at Charity Navigator’s efficiency ratings, and then we’d vote. The
students inevitably picked a charity from near the top of the rankings. And
then I’d give all our money away, right there in class. It was a satisfyingly
dramatic moment.
1
But it turns out that the overhead ratio is a terrible metric. It targets
internal costs—the amount a nonprofit spends on administrative costs, like
paying its employees. It presumes that nonprofits do more good when they
spend money externally, on things like digging wells, building houses, or
buying food for tsunami victims. It presumes that internal costs are a form
of waste. The metric paints a picture for us: Nonprofits are a pipeline for
money. Good nonprofits pass money through as efficiently as possible;
anything that gets stuck in the pipeline is a waste. The metric paints this

## Página 61

picture by taking a neutral, simple, mechanical fact—the overhead ratio—
and then using it as the measure of success .
This picture makes quick sense to outsiders, but it is vastly
oversimplified. Imagine you run a nonprofit devoted to building shelters for
unhoused people. Spending money on building shelters boosts your
efficiency rating. According to the metric, this is good; this counts as
success. But spending more money on paying your employees counts as
overhead and drops your efficiency rating. According to the metric, this is
failure. Now you have a problem. Suppose you want to hire a structural
engineer or a materials expert to research which shelter materials will last
the longest. This counts as internal costs, and the metric views them as
wasteful. So how can you compete for skilled and expert employees to
research better shelters if your rating plunges whenever you spend money
on hiring them?
To people in the nonprofit sector, the overhead ratio metric is obviously
broken. If you want to run a genuinely effective nonprofit, you actually
have to spend money on things like office space and competitive salaries.
The metric looks good to outsiders, but only because outsiders know very
little about the space. Here is the Gap again, between the complexity of
genuine effectiveness and the easier-to-measure quality of pipeline
efficiency.
The problem is that nonprofits are trying to do good in complicated ways,
like protecting ecosystems, building sustainable housing, or improving
health care. Whether they have succeeded is actually a difficult matter. To
evaluate it properly, you need to be buried in the particular domain of the
nonprofit. Proper evaluation requires trusting other actual experts in the
relevant field—housing, sanitation, education—along with experts in the
particular geographical area.
Charity Navigator oversees charities in all kinds of different expert
domains. The company itself doesn’t have the expertise to assess whether a
particular nonprofit succeeded in building better shelters for people. So they
use a simple, easy-to-apply proxy: the overhead ratio. You don’t have to
know anything about the complexities of housing to apply the overhead
ratio. It’s appealing because all you need to do is look at a nonprofit’s
accounting—and accounting works similarly across all charities. We can
mechanically measure pipeline throughput, which permits us to compare

## Página 62

charities that are working in very different terrains. But it works by ignoring
their differences.
The overhead ratio is exciting because it takes aim at an accessible
juncture point—exactly the place where radically different charities end up
using the most similar plumbing, which makes it easy to produce an
objective-looking comparison. But it doesn’t capture what the nonprofits
are actually doing. What the overhead ratio has going for it is not accuracy,
but extractability.
Maybe we should give up on the overhead ratio and try something better,
like the number of houses built. Once again, that’s a simple, easily counted
number, but it doesn’t capture any of the nuances. Were they good houses?
Will they last long? Were they houses that actually served the needs of the
people involved and fit the local environmental demands? Were they
delivered to the people who needed them? Were they built where they
would make the most impact—or just where it was easiest to build a lot of
cheap houses and make your “houses built” stat look bigger?
You may be familiar with the Dunning-Kruger effect, which states that
people with limited skill and expertise in a domain tend to overestimate
their abilities. If you’re stupid about a domain, it’s easy to miss how stupid
you are, because you don’t know how much you don’t know. Transparency
metrics expose us to the Dunning-Kruger effect in fancy institutional dress.
Many transparency metrics look good to us outsiders, but only because we
have a shallow understanding of the terrain.
This particular story ends on a possibly upbeat note. Several major donor
organizations eventually saw the problem with the overhead ratio. After
significant study, they concluded that the pervasive use of this metric was
forcing nonprofits to cut costs so dramatically that they couldn’t function
effectively. Charity Navigator has listened to pushback from experts in the
nonprofit sector and moved to decrease the centrality of the overhead metric
in its rating systems, though it’s still controversial whether the company has
done enough.
2
Here’s another case study, from Sally Engle Merry. Merry was an
anthropologist who specialized in human rights. She studied the US
Department of State’s attempts to rate how well different countries were
doing in reducing sex trafficking in its annual Trafficking in Persons
Report . During the time of Merry’s study, the TIP Report ’s rating was based
on the conviction rate of sex traffickers. To most of the world, this is an

## Página 63

extremely convincing metric, and world governments have been highly
motivated to improve their TIP ratings.
But, says Merry, if you actually understand the complexities of sex
trafficking, you’ll see that this is a vastly oversimplified metric. The
problem, she says, is that actual sex trafficking is incredibly hard for
governments to track. It occurs in the shadows, far away from government
surveillance. And what counts as sex trafficking turns out to be incredibly
slippery. For example, says Merry, how do you define “sex trafficker”?
Consider a woman facing starvation, who crosses an international border to
work in a brothel in order to survive. She does well enough and makes
enough money to bring back a little for her family. The next year, she brings
a starving friend across that border to work with her at the brothel. Is the
first woman now an international sex trafficker?
Faced with such invisibility and vagueness, the TIP Report focused on
something far easier for governments to track: convictions of sex
traffickers. Convictions are binary instead of vague, and they happen right
in the government’s sight. The problem with this metric, says Merry, is that
it suggests an extremely narrow approach to sex trafficking. It focuses on
policing as the only viable method.
But conviction rates are a very poor indicator of sex trafficking,
according to Merry. Sex trafficking is highly correlated with overall
poverty. If you decrease poverty, then sex trafficking tends to vanish on its
own. But then there won’t be any sex traffickers to catch and convict—
they’ll evaporate without coercion as the economic incentives shift. So if a
country reduced its ambient poverty and as a result reduced sex trafficking,
the TIP Report ’s metrics would report that it had failed —because the
conviction numbers had dropped.
The metric doesn’t actually encourage countries to find a long-term
solution to sex trafficking. Instead, it incentivizes countries to keep sex
trafficking around so that there will be plenty of traffickers to convict. Here
is the Gap again: Convictions are exactly the kind of clear, crisp objects that
are easy to count publicly. They just don’t correspond to what really
matters.
You might think this was just because the overhead metric and the
conviction rate metric are particularly crappy, and we can just make better
ones. But the problem is much deeper than that. It’s baked into the core
logic of public transparency. The goal of public transparency is for the

## Página 64

public to judge the success of some group of experts. To serve that function,
the metric has to be comprehensible by the public . But the public, as a
whole, can’t understand expert reasoning. The whole point of experts is that
they understand things the rest of us cannot.
We need experts precisely because we need to go beyond the average,
minimal, baseline understanding. But the whole point of transparency is to
bring experts within the reach of our average minimal, baseline
understanding.
3
THE PHILOSOPHER ONORA O’NEILL STUDIED TRUST IN INSTITUTIONS— especially
in medical experts. People, she said, think that trust and transparency go
together. But in fact, they’re deeply in tension. Transparency, she said,
demands that experts explain themselves to nonexperts. But they can’t
actually do it, because an expert’s real reasons are often opaque or
incomprehensible to nonexperts. The whole reason you go to a doctor is
that they understand things you don’t.
Nobody has enough mental power to understand everything by
themselves. The world is so vast and complicated that we have to divide it
up—each of us devoting ourselves to understanding one particular patch of
the world. So experts can’t explain themselves fully to the public, because
expert reasoning is, by its very nature, specialized.
O’Neill thought transparency forced experts to make up fake reasons for
public consumption. This meant that transparency would force experts to
deceive the public about what they did and why, and so undermine trust. I
agree, but I’m also worried about an even worse effect: Transparency can
also force experts to actually change what they do—to confine their actions
to what they can justify in public. Transparency can significantly undermine
expert action.
Of course, there are transparency measures that are based on expert
understanding. The difficulty scale in rock climbing, for example, is built
on the consensus of experienced rock climbers. But there’s no way for
outsiders to check on whether rock climbers are doing it right. In fact, when
non-climbers assess the difficulty of climbs, they tend to get it completely
wrong. Non-climbers are very impressed with fast climbing and big leaping
movements between large holds, which are often relatively easy for

## Página 65

experienced climbers. Non-climbers tend to radically underestimate the
difficulty of painstakingly slow climbing on microscopic holds.
This doesn’t matter much for climbing, but it matters massively for
things like medicine, education, and government. Much of the time, we use
transparency metrics because we are trying to figure out whether to trust a
whole community . When I’m doing educational outcomes assessment for
my philosophy department, I am reporting evidence of our success for a set
of suspicious overseers. I have to do this because the public at large—as
embodied, in this case, by the Utah state legislature—doesn’t know whether
to trust philosophers. A lot of people seem to think the whole enterprise of
philosophy is just pure bullshit. So they want evidence that we philosophers
are doing something useful. And they are unwilling to trust our opaque
judgment. This is why educational outcomes metrics tend to focus on easy
countables, like graduation rate, graduation speed, and employment rate.
These measures require no trust because counting them requires no
expertise, so it’s easy for outsiders to check the work.
We can see the same de-experting logic at work in the history of arts
funding. According to sociologist Jennifer Lena, American art funding
institutions, like the National Endowment for the Arts, initially used
specialists to decide which artists got the grants. They trusted artists, art
critics, and people from the relevant art community to make the choice. But
when the NEA was put under congressional oversight, congresspeople
accused the organization of making bad, corrupt, and biased choices about
4
where to send funds. Their evidence of corruption was that the NEA had
funded performances that ended up with bad box office returns and ticket
sales—proof, in the congresspeople’s eyes, that the supposed experts didn’t
know what they were talking about.
The problem is that what makes art good isn’t box office returns and
ticket sales. Great art can bring incredible experiences of profound beauty,
can move people to see the world in different ways. It can expand their
emotional horizons and shake up their understanding of the world—all of
which often translates to poor ticket sales. Box office returns only look like
a good measure of art if you don’t know much about art. But box office
returns had more political power precisely because they are a metric that
could be understood by nonexperts.
We’re exposed here again to the Gap. And the Gap arises because of the
profound distance between what is publicly accessible and what requires

## Página 66

expert sensitivity and trained judgment to discern. And when experts are
bound by public metrics, they are cut off from a crucial part of their
expertise. The demand for public transparency intrudes on the process of
goal setting. It forces experts to use goals that are comprehensible to the
public. This prevents them from using their experience and expertise to set
goals and targets. Their actions and choices will ultimately be driven
instead by what the rushed, hurried public thinks is important.
The Gap can intrude through external pressure on experts, or incentives.
If experts in an institution know they will be rewarded for doing well on the
metric and punished for doing badly, then they’ll be forced to take actions
that advance that metric. Instead of using their own understanding of what’s
important, they’ll be pushed to act on the public’s understanding of what’s
important—at least when their actions are visible. But it will be even worse
if the experts are value-captured by the transparency metric—if they start
wholly substituting the metric’s simple target for their own richer
understanding of what’s important. In that case, the expert will internalize
the public’s limited understanding in the core of all their decision-making.
To be absolutely clear: My claim isn’t that there’s some magical group of
“real” experts who should rule everything, and then the dumb masses. The
point is that the world is vast and complex, and there’s too much to know
about for any individual to handle. Each of us is an expert in our own patch,
but a nonexpert in everything else. And I don’t just mean formal expertise,
like having a medical degree or a scientific PhD. We are all experts in the
particular terrain of our lives: our jobs, our family, our local community, our
weird hobbies. I’m an expert in a few parts of philosophy, the European
board games of the 1980s and ’90s, the politics of my university, and the
history and culture of Vietnamese immigrants who grew up in San Jose.
And about almost everything else, I’m a novice.
Collectively, as a public, we’re inexpert about everything. And public
transparency metrics puts us—the collective inexpert public—in charge.
MANY OF US HAVE BEEN TRAINED TO THINK TRANSPARENCY IS all good, and the
more the better. But we are also intimately familiar with the downsides of
transparency. It’s easy to see the insensitivity and inexpertise of metrics
when you’re under the gun. When you’re the expert and it’s the rest of the
world looking in—watching you, demanding that you justify yourself in

## Página 67

clear, accessible, concrete terms—then you can see how much the metrics
miss.
Crucially, public metrics get rid of intuition or gut instinct—the wordless
certainty about the right thing to do. They force us to justify ourselves in the
cold light of general comprehensibility. They kill opacity. This is often a
5
very good thing; intuition is highly imperfect. Decades of empirical
research have shown how our intuition can display enormous subconscious
bias. Evaluations in hiring professional competence, for example, are highly
subject to irrelevant influences from factors like race, gender, class, and
regional accents. Transparency metrics are intended to remove such bias—
and often succeed—by forcing us not to use our gut instinct.
But our opaque intuitions aren’t always bad. Decades of empirical
research have also shown that genuine expertise often works through fast,
accurate intuition. Experienced pediatricians can walk into a waiting room
and see, with extremely high accuracy, which kids are seriously ailing—
6
which kids need emergency help, fast. Becoming an expert involves
acquiring a huge store of experience and then having your subconscious
produce a quick synthesis: a wordless intuition about the right thing to do,
an immediate perception, in the case of pediatricians, of who’s sick and
who’s healthy.
The problem is that our intuition isn’t all good or all bad. Opaque
intuition is where bias lives, but also where expertise and sensitivity thrive.
By forcing experts to justify themselves in the harsh light of public scrutiny,
metrics cut out both. They prevent corruption and bias—and they also
prevent experts from using their sensitivity and trained instincts. Metrics
cleanse our judgment process intrusively and indiscriminately. They are
moral bleach.
Transparency is effective but costly. And that cost is essentially entangled
with its effect. We need experts to act beyond what we can understand. But
we cannot trust them perfectly, so we ask them to explain themselves to us.
And that places a restriction on experts—to bind themselves to the actions
and reasons that can be understood by the general public.
Transparency is surveillance. It puts people under the watchful eye of a
suspicious public. And surveillance is a profoundly mixed blessing. It’s
costly, because it forces experts to be constantly worrying about how their
actions will be interpreted—and misinterpreted—by outsiders who don’t
share their expertise. So surveillance is useful when it’s deployed against

## Página 68

the corrupt, the biased, or the incompetent. But it’s limiting when it’s
deployed against the expert, the highly competent, and the extremely
sensitive. The problem is that we don’t know which is which ahead of time
—which is the whole reason we needed surveillance in the first place.
By tying everybody to the demand for public justification, we do two
things. We limit the harm that bad and incompetent people can do, but we
also limit what good and competent people can do. Transparency leashes
both kinds of people, forcing them all to operate within the public’s
comprehension. These two effects are inextricable, because transparency
works precisely by eliminating trust and replacing it with public oversight.
TRANSPARENCY IS PARTICULARLY PAINFUL WHEN IT UNDERMINES expert
judgment about values. And transparency metrics are usually, at their core,
about values. Metrics are supposed to be sitting in judgment over whether
some group has succeeded. To do that, they specify success in terms
everybody can understand.
We often assume that expertise is just technical—the little picky stuff
about how you do what you’re trying to do. Experts are just there to run the
machinery—but the goals and values guiding it all are always obvious and
accessible to everybody. But this is a mistake. Expertise also involves
seeing more deeply into what our true goals should be—grasping the subtle
values of the terrain. The beginner martial artist may think the purpose of
learning martial arts is to become a fighting badass; most serious martial
artists will tell you that the value is in generating self-discipline and
cultivating bodily awareness. My spouse started gardening because she
thought she could get us some delicious vegetables, but she slowly
discovered that gardening could give so much more. It immersed her in the
beauty of growth, the joy of seeing plants thrive. It gave her the profound
satisfaction of seeing the throbbing, interacting, tangled ecosystem hiding in
our own backyard.
The value of activities is often quite subtle. It takes time, devotion,
experience, and energy to see. The philosopher Talbot Brewer puts it this
way: When you start a new activity, you often have a very naive grasp of
what’s valuable about it. And then you start in on it, guided by your
oversimplified sense of what’s important—but in doing so, you come to a
7
richer and deeper sense of the value of the activity. That richer sense of

## Página 69

value changes and deepens how you do the thing, which in turns deepens
your understanding of its value, which feeds back and enriches how you do
the thing, on and on in an ever-deepening cycle.
When I started trying to exercise, I had only the barest conception of
what it could do for me. I thought the goal was to burn some calories by
pounding out miles on a treadmill. Maybe it would decrease my chance of
heart disease or something. I didn’t realize how much else I would find in it.
I couldn’t have imagined that I could come to find profound joy in feeling
my own body moving—that I would find delicious clarity in developing
greater physical control. Before I started rock climbing and yoga, I didn’t
have enough bodily awareness to even imagine the pleasure and joy it could
bring.
The problem with public transparency metrics is that they impose a
vision of value from the outside. For people who are long-soaked in an
activity, transparency imposes a superficial vision of value—a conception
from people who haven’t been soaked in the activity, who haven’t learned
what’s truly valuable about it.
This seems awfully unfair when you’re on the inside and know the value
of what you’re doing. But when you’re on the outside, the need for
transparency makes perfect sense. Because the world truly is full of bullshit.
It’s full of communities that claim to be doing something important: yoga
teachers, psychiatrists, anti-psychiatric Scientologists, philosophers,
chiropractors, wine connoisseurs, audiophiles, hipster coffee snobs,
fashionistas, board game fans, economists, and flashlight collectors. Some
of these are full of scammers, poseurs, and snobs. But right next to them are
other communities that are onto something subtle but really important. The
problem is that from the outside, poseurs and visionaries can be awfully
hard to distinguish.
The methodology of transparency is accessibility . But accessibility is a
double-edged sword. The demand for accessible explanations limits us to
the kinds of things anybody can understand. If the value of the activity is
subtle, then transparency metrics will miss the mark. And they will force
experts to change their goals, to pursue unsubtle, obvious targets.
Trust and transparency live in constant uneasy tension. The more we trust
experts, the more we leverage the power of specialization. But this requires
that we let experts off the leash—that we let them act in ways that pass
beyond our understanding. But the more we trust, the more room we leave

## Página 70

for corruption and bias to sneak into the system. So we demand
transparency—we secure ourselves from corruption—but we lose out on the
power of trusting experts.
So what’s the solution to this tension?
The hard truth is there is no solution. There’s only a painful trade-off. We
get to choose, in each case, where the slider goes. Sometimes we probably
want more transparency—like in political cases, in which the dangers of
corruption are vast. Sometimes the dangers of corruption are lower and the
goods of trust are higher—like in arts education. The mistake lies in
denying that there is always trade-off, in automatically trying to maximize
transparency, always. Public metrics let us peer into each other’s lives; they
make us comprehensible to each other, which makes it easy to judge one
another. But the price is that we are bound to use only those values that
everybody can instantly understand.

## Página 71