# 24. The Seductions of Clarity

## CHAPTER 24

The Seductions of Clarity
he second mask of metrics is clarity . Clarity hits us on two fronts at
once: first, in our scientific, logical mind, with an orderly, seemingly
T complete picture of the world. Metrics do this by presenting a
seductively clear picture of what’s important. They present a precise
judgment of success—a neat arrangement of the values of the world, made
simple and orderly. Simultaneously, the mask of clarity also hits us in the
pleasure center, showering us with the pleasure of getting it, of
understanding.
Clarity is a feeling of things falling into place. It is the feeling we get
when we understand things—when what seemed confusing and chaotic
suddenly snaps into focus and we see the underlying order. Clarity is the
1
feeling of things making sense . The psychologist Alison Gopnik once
characterized the feeling of getting a good explanation as a kind of
intellectual orgasm. There’s a satisfying aha feeling, a sense of
completeness, when your mind suddenly sees how things work. We take
pleasure in clarity—which is useful, because it drives us to try to
understand the world.
But the feeling of clarity is distinct from real understanding. And so it can
be faked. And this is particularly dangerous, because fake clarity can create
the illusion that our investigations are done, that everything is settled and
well understood, and that we can move on.
So how do you fake clarity? How do you create the illusion of
2
understanding? First, consider the real thing. Philosophers of science and
of education tell us that understanding is a distinctive phenomenon. It’s not
just knowing a lot of things. You can know a bunch of trivia, but if it’s all
just disconnected bits and pieces—a jumble of true facts—then you don’t

## Página 206

really understand. Understanding is holistic; it is having a working picture
of the whole—how the parts fit and how they interact.
In scientific explanation, real understanding involves having a mental
model of some scientific phenomenon that allows you to make predictions,
explain new events, and come up with new solutions. You’re not stuck with
a few rote, memorized procedures. You can adapt to new circumstances,
diagnose new problems, and improvise new solutions, because you
understand how the parts fit together. And you can communicate your
model to other people.
I know, by rote, that if certain lights turn on in my car dashboard, I
should add water or oil, or put air in the tires. But I don’t understand how a
car works beyond those memorized instructions. I can’t figure out why the
steering on my car sticks when it gets cold, or why this rattling sound shows
up when I hit sixty miles per hour. For that, I need a mechanic who actually
understands how cars work.
But I do understand a lot about cooking. Like John Thorne says, if all you
can do is follow a recipe by rote, you don’t really grasp the heart of the
dish. To understand a dish is to get the core—the sense of balance that is the
heart of the dish. I understand stews. I know the balance that tastes and
feels good, and I can improvise different routes to get there. I know if I
have a particularly dank and funky bit of sausage, I can up the sweet and
sour to balance it out—maybe with a bit of extra tomato, or maybe apple
cider vinegar and honey.
That’s real understanding. But if we can fake the feeling of
understanding, then we will have an extremely powerful weapon. Because
understanding is often the endpoint of inquiry . If you think you don’t
understand something, then you have a reason to keep thinking about it—to
keep investigating, exploring, learning. Fuzziness and unclarity is a signal
to keep tinkering with your model and checking to see if you’ve got it right.
But when you think you understand something, you’re done. The feeling of
clarity is a signal to stop improving your model and start using it to explain
and intervene in the world. So if we can infuse a belief system with an
overwhelming feeling of clarity, we might be able to get people to accept it
without further scrutiny.
And if you’re designing a belief system to get people to just accept it,
then you’ve got a pretty free hand. If you don’t care about the truth, you are
free to oversimplify your belief system, to optimize it for the feeling of

## Página 207

clarity. Accurate belief systems have to be loyal to the complexity of the
world. But cheap belief systems can ignore complexity and just amp up that
delicious feeling of understanding. (I actually stole this analysis from my
mother, who used to say, “Of course fast food is more delicious than what I
cook for you. It’s because fast-food restaurants only care about being
delicious. They don’t have to balance that with being nutritious.” I’m
worried about cognitive junk food.)
So if all you cared about was a catchy belief system, you could build a
fake model —an oversimplified, extremely coherent picture of everything.
So when people started using your fake model, they’d see that everything is
connected; they’d feel empowered to explain anything and everything with
their fake model. And they could communicate their model easily. This is
why conspiracy theories are so appealing. A conspiracy theory offers a
powerful but simple model of the world. Like games, conspiracy theories
present us with a more manageable, intellectually tractable version of the
world.
Conspiracy theories are much more satisfying than actual science,
because science has a complexity problem. You can’t actually cram all of
science into one human head. At best, you’ll have partial understanding of a
few little patches. There will always be unknowns, in which you have to
trust other people. An honest understanding of the real world won’t give
you that all-encompassing knowledge-orgasm you crave, because the world
is too awkwardly large.
I don’t think most seductive clarities are the intentional result of
malicious design (though some are). Often it’s accidental. We make
simplifications for all sorts of other reasons: to reduce the cognitive load, to
make coordination easy, to manage data across scale. But if those
simplifications can give us the feeling of clarity, then they can also
accidentally seduce us. Most metrics weren’t designed by some evil
manipulator. They were designed for familiar and sensible reasons:
transparency, objectivity, and all that. But because metrics aim at
accessibility and easy comprehensibility—because they offer predigested
summaries—they create an exaggerated feeling of value coherence. Metrics
offer a seductively clear picture of what’s important.
Compare two people; let’s call them Artist Andy and Metrics Mike. Andy
is a rapper. She started out as a kind of conventional rapper of her era—trap
beats, deadpan tight flow, ironic lyrics. But lately she’s had other impulses.

## Página 208

She’s been drawn to simpler lyrics—droning repetitions of simple word
patterns. She can’t explain why, but it’s expressing something in her—her
feelings of being stuck at a particular point in life. She’s also bored of trap
beats; she’s been experimenting with chopping up bits of tape of her
grandparents speaking, fuzzing them out and looping them. There’s
something beautiful in the pattern of their accents.
She doesn’t have a pat justification for any of this. It’s just what she finds
compelling. She’s definitely being guided by something—some subtle
glimmerings of beauty, some new form of expressiveness. But if you ask
her why her new songs sound the way they do, she’ll stumble around for
words. She is sincere, but her justifications are fuzzy and scattered.
Mike, on the other hand, has a clear target. He runs a politics website.
He’s targeting higher page views. He has good motives; he believes in the
mission of his publication. But his actions are all oriented toward that
simple metric. He knows which topics get more views; there’s good data
from the analytics. He knows what kind of language people respond to:
clear and unequivocal statements of outrage.
Andy’s grasp of why she’s doing what she’s doing looks less clear. The
parts don’t fit together so neatly. Mike’s explanations look exceptionally
clear. He has a single, simplified target, and all his actions flow from it—so
he can give sweeping, coherent justifications for all his actions.
To an outsider, it looks like Mike has more clarity about his values. He
sounds more articulate. He probably feels more decisive about his actions,
internally. His actions are wholly understandable, integrated, and
communicable. Andy has none of this.
The problem is that Mike gained this sense of clarity by narrowing his
values. He’s gamed the process of justifying himself. He’s strategically
selected values for which it’s easier to generate precise data and coherent
explanations. This is fake clarity, achieved by avoiding the full richness of
what’s really important.
What Andy has over Mike is a loyalty to the thick, tangled complexity of
what’s truly meaningful. But that’s hard, because what’s really valuable is
often subtle and hard to express—especially when we’re on the track of
something new. If we are sincere and respectful of the value density of the
world, we will rarely be able to generate quick, coherent, accessible
explanations. The engineered coherence of metrics will win in a clarity fight
every time.

## Página 209

GOOD SCIENCE DOESN’T FALL INTO THIS TRAP, BECAUSE GOOD science is
responsive to errors . Science builds models and then tests those models
against the world, alert to any signs that they are incomplete. This is what
drives science to move beyond the simple and satisfying models that can fit
easily in one’s head and toward that brutal, brain-breaking complexity.
Those simple models couldn’t fit all the evidence, so we had to replace
them with something much more complicated. As the philosopher of
science William Wimsatt puts it, the scientific method is built to be
constantly on the lookout for any signals of error and then relentlessly use
3
those errors to improve its models. Science, says Wimsatt, is built around
a system of error metabolism .
Seductive clarity works by avoiding error metabolism. One clever way to
design for seductive clarity, then, is to build a belief system that conceals
signs of its own mistakes.
So here is a recipe for a seductive clarity trap:
First, build a belief system that offers a satisfyingly clear, coherent
explanation of the world.
Second, make sure the belief system conceals any evidence of its
own error.
In conspiracy theories, the error-concealment device is usually an add-on
—a separate set of beliefs about those lying, cheating scientists and
journalists. Conspiracy theories build echo chambers by getting their
believers to dismiss any nonbelievers as untrustworthy. A good echo
4
chamber will block their followers from receiving any evidence of error.
Hyper-simplified value systems are even better; they are almost perfect
clarity traps. First, they offer a feeling of beautiful coherence. But second,
and more important, hyper-simplified value systems have a built-in error-
concealment mechanism—because values control where you look in the
first place.
IF YOUR VALUES ARE TOO SIMPLISTIC, HOW WOULD YOU DISCOVER your error?
You’d have to spend enough time looking at some other part of the world to
discover some subtle value that you’ve been missing. But your value

## Página 210

system tells you what’s important in the first place. It tells you where to
look—what to pay attention to, investigate, and spend time with. So an
oversimplified value system can get you to avoid looking for subtle values
—by labeling those soul-opening activities as inefficient wastes of time.
Artificially clarified values set up a nasty feedback loop. Once you’ve
redefined success in such clear terms, it’s easy to forget about what’s been
left out, because it no longer seems important. Maybe you start to think all
that’s important in life is money. Of course, there are all kinds of things that
could show you there’s more to life than money. You might find richer,
fuller views of a meaningful life in art, literature, philosophy, or friendships.
Exploring a hobby like knitting could show you how much joy there could
be in intricate, meditative movement for its own sake. But here’s the
problem: If you’ve already decided that all that’s important in life is money,
you’ll be very unlikely to spend any time on such useless distractions,
because they won’t look like good paths to money.
Values control what we seek out. And then the other stuff, we dismiss.
Dismissing things isn’t necessarily bad; it’s part of basic human
functioning. The world is overstuffed with things, and we need to ration our
attention. We are constantly doing attentional triage; our values guide that
triage. But the problem is that what’s really valuable in the world is often
subtle. So we if we triage too hard, we might end up throwing out all the
subtle values, without giving them enough of a chance.
Let’s call this value collapse . This is a feedback loop whereby
oversimplifying your values changes how you approach the world, what
you notice about it, and what you spend time exploring. So you run into a
narrower set of experiences—which in turn reinforces your oversimplified
values. Value collapse is the worst possible end result of value capture. The
image I have in my head is of a star collapsing from its own gravity and
forming a black hole. Once you’ve gone this far, there’s no escape.
DOESN’T THIS HAPPEN WITH ALL VALUES? NOT EXACTLY. WHAT makes metrics
particularly good at seductively trapping us is the precision and clarity of
their edges . Values with precise edges make dismissal easier.
Take regular, fuzzy values—the old-school kind, with no mechanical
scoring procedure. Here are some of my fuzzy values: fun, friendship,
connection, and cool ideas. For each of these values, there are some things

## Página 211

that are obviously in, and some things that are obviously out. A party in the
desert with my climbing buddies is definitely fun, and doing my taxes is
definitely not. But in between what is obviously important and what is
obviously unimportant is a huge gray area—what we could call the
exploratory zone of value. We’re not sure whether that stuff is valuable, so
we might investigate them to find out more.
When I was dating, I valued fun times and intellectual excitement. And I
had a pretty clear idea of what was at the center of my dating values: I
wanted somebody witty and curious and intellectually playful. I liked verbal
sparring partners, people who I could skip ideas off—and who I could get
drunk with and then have cheerful, wild arguments about anything and
everything. And I knew that there were some sorts of people—serious,
career-oriented, and wholly responsible people who were mostly interested
in financial security—who I shouldn’t spend any time dating.
But I also ended up dating all kinds of people in the fuzzy middle. I dated
a quiet artist who looked carefully at the world. Her idea of fun wasn’t
getting drunk and arguing with strangers at bars; it was going on late-night
runs on the beach. This didn’t exactly fit my idea of fun, but it didn’t
obviously not fit, either. It was a bewildering novelty. So I tried it out.
She particularly liked running on the beach on moonless nights, by
starlight. This was at first, for me, an exercise in terror and confusion. But I
slowly started figuring out the strange delight in it—the weird
disorientation that comes from running in near-total darkness, the
heightened sensation of sand in between your toes and the sound of the surf.
I tripped and flopped on my face a ton of times. But it turns out that eating
shit in the sand at night is actually kind of awesome. It turns out that
nighttime beach running is ludicrous and thrilling and sensitizing all at the
same time.
But when we precisely define the edges of what we value—when we
give our values mechanical edges—we eliminate that exploratory zone.
Things are either in or they’re out, immediately. Mechanical values have
been reengineered with obvious edges, which we can apply instantly,
without judgment or deliberation. If you value only what’s low-calorie,
what gets more clicks and follows, or what gets more money, you can throw
out most of the world without a second thought. Mechanical values make it
easier to dismiss much of the world.

## Página 212

And it’s easy to get stuff done when you’ve learned how to dismiss the
majority of the world in an instant. We can eliminate wasted time exploring
worthless garbage. We are now much more ruthlessly efficient and
successful—or at least we will look successful to anybody who shares our
narrowed notion of success.
Some people will tell you to always use maximally precise language in
every context. This is a mistake. Precise value language would be entirely
appropriate if we already knew all there was to know about what was
important. But if we don’t, then using clear, mechanical values discourages
exploration. Precise values embody a closed-minded spirit about what’s
important in the world.
5
Sometimes vague language is better because it expresses the truth that
things are unclear or unsettled. This is why poets will often use metaphors
and contradictory language; it is a meaningful inarticulateness. Vague
language is the appropriate vessel for speaking from a position of
uncertainty.
If you value what’s fun, what’s interesting, what’s curious, what’s
creative—those concepts have imprecise edges. Applying these terms
always involves dealing with fuzz and unclarity. But you should feel
uncertain when you’re in unknown territory. Fuzzy values are appropriate
when you don’t yet know everything about what’s important. They
encourage exploration, because they don’t have sharp edges. Fuzzy values
build in an open-minded attitude.

## Página 213