# 9. The Score Shapes the Struggle

## CHAPTER 9

The Score Shapes the Struggle
et’s get back to our big question about games: Why do we adopt
rigid scoring systems in order to play? Why give up creative
L freedom and force ourselves to desire what the game tells us to
desire? We’ve made some progress already; we’ve learned that when we
adopt a game’s scoring system, we are letting the game shape our desires
and how we’ll act. This lets us plunge into the alternate self that the game
has prepared for us. But why would we ever want to do that?
In games, scoring systems serve the function of communicating goals .
But this allows another function: It lets the game shape and communicate
new kinds of action. This is why we take on restrictions and goals in games
—because we want to experience a specific kind of action that another
person has carefully sculpted for us.
Games are an art form. And when we experience art, we aren’t
completely free. When we read a novel, we don’t imagine whatever the hell
comes into our heads; we let the novel direct our imagination. When I read
a novel, there is plenty of room for me to freely respond. I can have
different emotional reactions, different interpretations. I can fill in the blank
spots of the world in my own way. But that only happens when we follow
lots of fairly strict rules: rules about grammar, about what different words
mean, about what order to read the novel in. (If you read all the words of
Moby Dick in scrambled, random order, you haven’t actually read Moby
Dick .)
Art uses shared rules to create a stable bridge between people. This
stability permits the precise transmission of experiences and ideas. A
novelist uses language, with all its rules and shared meanings, in order to
tell us a story about specific people doing specific things. A game designer
is doing something analogous, but in a different medium. The game

## Página 89

designer uses scores and rules to shape who we will be and what we will
face in the game. And they do that to give us all kinds of new experiences
of action—of fascinating struggles, tense decisions, brilliant epiphanies, and
delightful motion.
The game designer has incredibly fine-grained control over our play. So
much of what we do in a game—what actions we take and how they feel—
is set by the exact rules and scoring system of the game.
First, game designers set our abilities during the game. In sports, they
often do this by subtraction. You take a basic human being and then you tell
them what they’re not allowed to do. These limitations can create a
fascinatingly narrow focus, which can plunge us into unexplored parts of
our abilities. For those of us who don’t play soccer, we mostly just use our
feet for basic foot-type stuff: standing and walking. But soccer forbids us to
use our hands, and so plunges us into our feet—and pushes us to discover
exactly how mobile, controlled, and precise they can be.
One of my favorite experimental role-playing games is Sign , from
Thorny Games. It’s a live-action role-playing game, based on the real-life
story of the invention of Nicaraguan Sign Language. In 1977, Nicaragua
had no sign language of its own. The government tried a project: They
gathered together fifty deaf schoolchildren from around the country and
tried to teach them to lip-read. Instead, the children spontaneously invented
their own sign language—a rich, fully functional one, which eventually
became the official sign language of Nicaragua. It’s a minor human miracle
that linguists still study to this day.
In Sign , your group plays as these schoolchildren. The game is played in
complete silence. At the beginning of the game, you are assigned a goal: an
inner secret that you are yearning to express. (In my first game, it was “I
miss my cat more than I miss my parents.”) But you have no means to
express it. Over the course of a few hours, you will all have to invent a sign
language together, in order to communicate. To make it playable in an
evening, the game permits each player to clearly set the meaning of three
signs. The first sign will be their own name. The other two signs can be
connected to any concept they choose. In my game, I created a sign for
love : tapping a fist to my heart.
Then you use these signs to improvise new ones. And you hope,
desperately, that you’re all understanding these new signs the same way. I
needed a sign for hate , so I built it off love —I moved my fist toward my

## Página 90

heart, then blocked it with my other hand and threw it away dramatically. I
thought people knew what I meant, but there was no way to know for sure. I
just had to use the sign, and feel out if other people seemed to be
comprehending and signing it back to me in the same way. And then you
use your new signs to build even more new signs, erecting a teetering
staircase of uncertain language.
Our first game was so intense—so frustrating, and so deep, so connecting
and isolating all at once—that my spouse burst into tears in the middle of it.
At the end of the game, we blew out the candles, turned the lights back up,
and started talking again. Immediately, people wanted to reveal their inner
secrets, to see if we had successfully communicated and won. But I forbade
it. I made people burn the little sheets of paper with their inner secrets and
never discuss it again. This, I felt, was in the spirit of the game: that we are
always just hoping, but could never be absolutely sure, that we have, in fact,
connected.
THE GOAL IS THE HEART OF A GAME—THE THING THAT SETS THE whole
contraption into clattering motion. In Sign , the restriction is no speech—but
there is no game until we add the goal of communicating our inner secret.
By setting a goal, we bring the obstacles into being. And if you change
the goals, you change the obstacles. Here is a rocky cliff, full of massive
outcroppings and little cracks. Look at it with no goals in your head.
Nothing is an obstacle yet. The cracks are just cracks, the blank spots are
just blank spots. Nothing on the cliff is useful or challenging, because
there’s nothing we’re trying to do. Now add a goal: climb to the top. Now
the big outcroppings become major obstacles to our progress. The cracks
and holes become useful aids—places to stick our hands and feet. And the
blank, featureless spots are the most fearsome obstacles of all, because
there’s nothing to step on or grab.
Let’s change games. We’ll keep the same cliff but change the goal. Let’s
play a speed-painting game, in which we try to quickly paint an accurate
watercolor of the cliff. The obstacles change completely. The blank patches
of wall are now the easy parts; I can paint those with a couple of big loose
wet brushstrokes. The cracks and holes are now the hard part, full of
painstaking details to capture. Obstacles don’t become obstacles until
you’re trying to get past them, so different goals create different obstacles.

## Página 91

This is one of Bernard Suits’s core insights: There is a paradox of
freedom at the heart of games. Game rules seem to restrict us, but they’re
actually creating more freedom and possibilities—because game rules bring
new kinds of action into being. Before we created the rules of basketball,
there was no such thing as dribbling, passing, or blocking a pass. Those
goals and constraints summoned those actions into reality. Before the rules
of chess, there was no such thing as checkmating your opponent, or starting
with a Queen’s Gambit, or playing a clever sacrifice. Before games, there
was no such thing as a real-time-strategy grunt rush, or assembling a fast
Magic deck, or rolling a critical hit in Dungeons & Dragons (D&D).
And by finely controlling the goals, abilities, and obstacles, we can
precisely control the resulting action and how it makes us feel. Change the
scoring system just a tiny bit—what counts as points, what counts toward
victory—and you change the entire feel of the game.
Some of the most intricate and gorgeous scoring system designs I’ve
found lately are from the world of indie tabletop role-playing. This is what
happens when you take the basic framework of Dungeons & Dragons and
give it to weirdo experimental artists. The community of indie role-players
has spent years bending the basic framework of D&D to make it even more
creative, more emotional, and more expressive of the weirder corners of the
human soul.
Dungeons & Dragons is a narrative, storytelling game, in which you play
through various adventures using rules, dice, and your imagination to
conquer dungeons and complete quests. In D&D, players take on the role of
a unique character whose abilities are specified numerically. These are your
stats: Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, Charisma,
and your various skills, each represented by a single number. You go
through the world trying to overcome various challenges, and the game
tests whether you can do them by asking you to roll against a certain stat.
The higher your stat, the more likely your in-game character is to perform
the task. The game is run by the Dungeon Master, who is in charge of the
world. They set the world, play all the other incidental characters and the
monsters, create the obstacles, and fill in all the external narrative.
The game rewards the players for their various successes with two kinds
of points: gold and experience points, or XP. D&D, in its earliest versions,
was very clear about the main source of XP and gold: killing monsters and
looting their bodies. And D&D was clear about the main use of XP and

## Página 92

gold: improving your gear and stats, which let you kill harder monsters.
These mechanics pushed players toward a very specific vibe. As one of
1
D&D’s critics put it, when you just follow the basic rule set, it tends to
generate one standard narrative: Go into a new room, kill some anonymous
strangers, loot their bodies, and repeat, occasionally interspersed with
shopping. That system fit some players’ purposes nicely—especially those
who wanted to play a game of optimizing their gear and stats for maximum
speedy progression.
But it was a poor fit for many other players’ interests. Lots of folks came
to D&D to have epic adventures, to go on high fantasy quests, to make
interesting moral choices, to be heroes and paragons of virtue. But the game
system pushed them toward this endless kill-loot-shop cycle. You could, of
course, ignore the point system and go do something else. But the basic
mechanics of the game—the baked-in rules and scoring system—were
largely oriented toward kill-loot-shop. And many players, including my
friends and me, followed the scoring system into endless rooms of
anonymous murder, and then wondered afterward why our stories weren’t
quite as epic as we’d hoped.
Some indie game designers decided that these problems arose from the
basic rule system and incentive structure of old-school D&D. Nothing, for
example, in old-school D&D rules incentivizes you to act in character. Your
character may have low Intelligence and do badly when you roll on that stat
—but you have no incentive to make your character do dumb things. And
the team has no incentive to bicker or create character conflict. When you
kill something or complete a quest, the XP is, by default, shared equally
among all players. These incentives push you to being a well-oiled, efficient
kill squad—which may be good for a story about a military special-ops
team. But it’s less good for inspiring twisty narratives of character conflict
and drama.
So the indie folks started playing around with the basic mechanics of
role-playing, and came up with some truly astonishing game design
innovations. Much of it involved hacking the scoring system—giving points
for acting in character and driving the narrative into interesting places. John
Harper’s extraordinary design Lady Blackbird shows off many of these
innovations. The primary rule set is only one page long, and it comes with a
prepackaged set of characters and a scenario. Just like in D&D, the game
rewards you with XP that you can use to improve your character. But unlike

## Página 93

in D&D, there are no automatic XP for killing monsters, or even for
completing quests. Instead, your character comes with a set of “Keys,”
which are their core motivations or character traits. And you get XP for
2
hitting your Keys—for acting in character.
The game comes with ready-made characters, built with Keys that put
them at constant odds with each other. The noblewoman Lady Blackbird’s
Keys are to escape the Empire and meet up with her space-pirate lover,
Uriah Flint. The bodyguard Naomi Bishop’s Keys are to protect Lady
Blackbird, to crush the Empire, and to battle worthy foes. The airship
captain Cyrus Vance has been paid to escort Lady Blackbird to Uriah Flint
—but his Key is to act on his hidden longing for Lady Blackbird. And the
goblin pilot Snargle just has the Key of doing stupid daredevil stuff to show
off at every possible opportunity. The players fill in the details, but the basic
mechanics push them relentlessly toward glorious, inventive conflict.
The rules also say you get XP for hitting your Keys, but you earn double
points for doing so in a way that gets you and your teammates into trouble.
This point system creates an entirely different set of motivations for the
players. The players are constantly looking for opportunities to stir shit up
in character. The scoring system orients them toward creating narrative
tension by playing in character. And it works. Lady Blackbird reliably gets
great stories out of the players. (Later editions of D&D have begun
borrowing innovations from the indie scene and giving points for acting in
character.)
Lady Blackbird has my single favorite rule in any role-playing game,
involving a secondary point system. Characters start the game with a small
pool of “energy points,” which they use to add bonuses to their dice roll—
making them more likely to pull off any daring stunts. But your energy
points run out quickly. To get them back, you need to have a “refreshment
scene,” in which you and another character have a moment of intimacy—
where you talk and reveal shared backstory. Instead of driving the players to
endlessly kill and loot, this point system pushes the players to invent more
and more character history and motivation. And the rule gives the whole
game a deliciously cinematic rhythm. You have escapades, use up all your
energy points, and barely survive. And then you hide out in a cave or a back
room somewhere and have that quiet, intimate moment, and you emerge
renewed and ready for more. The game mechanics push toward a

## Página 94

delightfully cinematic rhythm of alternating action, exhaustion, and renewal
through character connection.
All this narrative isn’t preset by the game designer. It emerges
spontaneously from a thousand player decisions. And the decisions and
stories are the players’ own—but they are deeply shaped by the game
system. I’ve played this game a dozen times, and every time the story
turned out completely different. But the game system reliably generated
rich, dramatic narratives—and it was the mechanics and point system that
helped push us there.
Game designers have a profound control over the general shape of the
players’ actions. But the curious thing about games is that this control isn’t
total. Game designers usually don’t tell us exactly what to do. They aren’t
like novelists, who fix every action of every character. Game designers
work a step back. They shape the general contours of our action, but not the
precise details. They give us motivations and abilities, and an environment
full of obstacles to face—but then set us free to act, to figure out how to
achieve those goals. Our actions are still our own.
In Lady Blackbird , we once invented a backstory about how I, the
captain, first met my goblin sky pilot when we were on opposite sides of a
war. We’d shot each other out of the sky, landed on the same desert island,
and became friends when we had to learn to dive into the coral reefs to
harvest whale snot to eat. That story was ours. But it’s the game designers
who set up the rules that drove us relentlessly toward such delightfully
weird-ass stories like that—by specifying the motivations, the abilities, and
the obstacles of our in-game selves.

## Página 95

## Part 3

W H Y U S E M E C H A N I C A L S C O R I N G ?

## Página 96