# 12. Flexibility Through Restriction

## CHAPTER 12

Flexibility Through Restriction
fter the previous chapter, you might have started to think the true
problem, at the root of things, is just using mechanical rules for
A evaluation—that any kind of mechanical rule set in a scoring
system will suck the life out of everything, and that we should perpetually
try to keep things soft, gushy, and ill-defined whenever we’re evaluating
anything. But that, I think, is an oversimplification. Because there’s a clear
upside to mechanical scoring systems. And the shining example has been
staring us in the face the whole time.
Games often have incredibly clear and perfectly mechanical scoring
systems. And when taken in the right spirit, they are the opposite of soul-
deadening. In games, mechanical scoring systems can be the gateway to
delight, fluidity, and flexibility. Games are a place where mechanical
scoring systems can help us explore the space of values. The paradox of
mechanical rules is: Sometimes they trap us, and sometimes they set us
free.
So what’s the difference?
GAMES SUGGEST THE OUTLINES OF AN ALTERNATE SELF, AND we flow into it,
taking on alternate desires and alternate abilities. We pay attention to
different reasons. What matters in ordinary life falls away; new things start
mattering keenly. Our agency is fluid, and games provide a container that
we can pour ourselves into. They provide a temporary shape for us to take
on in our souls.
This fluidity of agency is not unique to games; it happens all over the
place. Games just make it easier to see.

## Página 116

The notion of agency I’m using here is an old one. I’m talking about it in
the sense that trading companies had agents, or that I have a literary agent.
In that old sense of the word, an agent is somebody who represents some
set of interests. If you have an agent, they represent you. When they are
acting as your agent, they are supposed to make choices—not out of their
own interests and values, but out of yours. As the philosopher Carol Rovane
puts it: An agent is some entity that considers reasons, makes choices based
1
on those reasons, and acts. And if you change the reasons that you act on,
you change your agency.
It turns out that our cares and desires and rationality are more fluid than
we might have thought. We can shift between different perspectives, change
how we reason and what we care about. This isn’t unique to games. We do
this all the time. We shift roles, which involves changing how we reason
and what drives us. I, for example, have a “teacher” mode. When I’m in
teacher mode, I dampen down a lot of my normal self. It didn’t always used
to be that way. When I was a new teacher, I brought my full self into the
classroom, and this actually caused all kinds of problems. For example, I
could tell that certain students were from my tribe. They liked the same
bands I liked, had the same sense of humor, the same politics. I vibed with
them more; I was nicer and chiller and more relaxed talking to them. And
this, it turned out, was a terrible way to teach. I had personal favorites, and
the other students resented it. So, over the years, I learned to turn that part
of myself off. My social side that loves certain personalities and detests
others—I pretty much get rid of that in the classroom. Instead, I carve out a
smaller self, a more impartial self. I become a person aimed at providing an
equal educational opportunity to every student, helping everybody become
better at reading and reflecting and analyzing.
Such role-shifting is incredibly common. I used to be a food critic, and I
can still put on my critic hat. I can look at any piece of art—paintings,
comics, TV shows, pop songs, a taco—and go merciless mode. From that
mental angle, I will be deeply picky and deeply critical. I will be on a
relentless hunt for real originality and subtlety. Then there’s another role I
play: parent. And in that role, every single drawing my kid makes is
absolutely goddamn amazing .
We humans have an enormous capacity for agential fluidity. We can shift
roles and reasons like changing hats. What it is to be an official, to act in an
official capacity, is to ignore a lot of your personal reasons. A police officer,

## Página 117

a tax commissioner—they’re not supposed to make choices based on who
they like, who is part of their tribe, who shares their musical tastes. They’re
only supposed pay attention to a narrow set of official reasons. Weirdly,
what we want from our officials is to have our particular humanity be
substantially ignored.
IN GAMES, I ALSO IGNORE A LOT OF MY USUAL SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS . I ignore
the fact that this person is my spouse or my friend—and I just go all out to
defeat them. Or I temporarily cancel out my hatred for a person if they’re
on my team. But this time I do it not to be an impartial official, but because
it’s fun.
And games make our fluidity far easier and quicker to exercise. It took
me about five years to learn to enter the “impartial teacher” role. But in
games, we can do it in an instant. We can open up a rule book, read the
rules, and plunge ourselves into a new form of agency. How is this
possible?
Here is my proposal: Games can support such quick agential fluidity
precisely because the rules and scoring system of a game are mechanical .
Mechanical rules are engineered to be clear, so that everybody knows
how to apply them. Most game scoring systems are mechanical: They tell
you exactly what you need to do to get a point. In Dungeons & Dragons,
each monster is worth an explicit number of experience points, and you
collect those points by killing the monster, which involves damaging it past
its explicit number of hit points.
John Dewey suggested that every art form crystallized something that we
did naturally—extracted it from normal life and made it more intense and
perfect. Games take the natural agency-shifting that we already do—our
ability to flit between different abilities and motivations—and heighten it.
They play with our natural fluidity, sculpting it with precision.
WE’VE ARRIVED AT ANOTHER ONE OF THESE WEIRD PARADOXES of human life:
how strict rules can sometimes make us more playful and more exploratory.
One of the curious things about tabletop role-playing games is that you’re
trying to engage in a creative act, one of storytelling and play, but then you
saddle yourself with all these rules and point structures. Outsiders of the
hobby will sometimes ask why. Why do all that, why confine yourself with

## Página 118

those rules? Why restrict yourself when you’re just playing? Why not just
cut loose, throw away the rules, and tell stories out of the pure freedom of
your mind?
Weirdly, pure freedom usually doesn’t work out all that well. Role-
playing designers have experimented with minimal rule sets, getting rid of
scoring systems and character skill points, and just pointing you in the
general direction of a story. It turns out minimal, rule-less role-playing
systems don’t work that well for most people. They often end up just telling
the same tired stories over and over again. More rules and restrictions—
more structure—strangely enough, often lead to more creativity.
It’s an old idea that constraints spur creativity. Poets know it. Writing free
verse can freeze you up, but when you make yourself stick to a specific
poetic form, the intense restrictions can spur you to creative heights. Role-
playing game players and designers know that very well, too. The structure
of constraints in role-playing offers a spur to creativity.
Take, for instance, rolling the dice. Almost every successful role-playing
game has dice rolls. Designers have tried to eliminate dice from role-
playing games, but found that diceless games usually made for worse
stories. Why? One theory is that without dice rolls, people are more free—
and when they’re free, they tend to tell predictable stories. Under pressure,
players usually end up rehashing the standard tropes and clichés.
But everything changes when you’re forced to roll some dice and see if
you succeed. The mechanics of the system push you into unexpected
events. You thought your master swordsman would have no trouble
showing off and you try to do an acrobatic swing from the rafters—but you
make an incredibly unlucky roll, and the dice say you fail. The system
forces something unexpected on you, and now it’s off the rails—and the
story becomes new and alive.
The scoring system can also be tuned toward creativity. Recall Lady
Blackbird , where you got points for acting in character, and double points
for getting into trouble by acting in character. Once again, the clarity of the
rules goads people into action. It’s one thing to say, “Your character is a sad
ex-orphan with parental authority issues and a need to prove themselves.
Act in character.” It’s another thing to say, “Your character gets a point
whenever they show off in front of their friends, and gets a point whenever
they refuse an order.” The latter system is far easier to be guided by in the
heat of high-speed improvisational storytelling.

## Página 119

Of course, a trained improv actor could use the nonmechanical
instruction set and do a great job. But they’re also using a system—a subtler
and more inchoate one that they learned through plenty of practice. My
point is not that mechanical scoring systems are the only way to get good
storytelling or good character work. It’s that they make it easier and quicker
to dive into an alternate character. They make new perspectives more
accessible.
BUT HOW DO RIGID RULES ENABLE PLAYFULNESS AND EXPLORATION? Some
people think rules and play are deeply opposed in spirit. The games and
2
play scholar Miguel Sicart believes games kill play. True play, he says, is
about getting beyond the rules, transcending restrictions. Games with
prespecified rules and goals are antithetical to the spirit of pure creativity
and freedom.
I think this is a false dilemma. Games are a rigid structure that cultivates
playfulness, a structured system that encourages lightness. They are
temporary rigid structures that can actually help you be more free.
All communication requires a certain amount of rigidity. We can’t
communicate at all if every single person invents their own peculiar
language. We need to share some rules in order to talk. We need a stable
structure as a foundation, to enable the fast exchange of ideas, the easy flow
of creativity between people.
Art is also at the nexus of rigidity and freedom. Literature, for example,
is a powerful goad to the imagination. Literature lets us explore alternate
social systems and emotional landscapes. But this all depends on an
underlying rigid structure of language and narrative convention. Jane
Austen couldn’t exercise her brand of laser-focused psychological insight
and cutting wit without access to an enormous body of stable meanings.
Language involves rigid rules about exactly what each word means, and
how we should interpret particular grammatical structures. Language
connects us, but for that we need a pretty stiff bridge.
Games can do something similar. They communicate new kinds of life by
using clear rules, such as absolutely mechanical conditions for victory. In
fact, game designers often work by taking fuzzy activities and transforming
them into something more precise and mechanical.

## Página 120

Imagine a version of basketball in which people are awarded points for
displaying physical skill and athletic virtuosity, period. Those categories, as
stated, are quite hard to judge. There aren’t any mechanical criteria for skill
and virtuosity. So we created one: the basketball hoop. This is a
mechanization device that creates a clear, mechanical binary condition for
victory. It’s a system designed to transform some inchoate judgment of
physical skill and athletic virtuosity into a quantized point system. (And the
basketball net is actually an accessibility device, to amplify the visual
clarity of the achievement. If you had the hoop alone, with no net, people
might argue about whether the ball went through.)
Games with mechanical scoring conditions make it far easier to shift your
agency around, by providing a clear, explicit recipe for evaluation . They tell
you how to evaluate your success, in terms that anybody can pick up on.
They orient you with precision. It’s hard to know what exactly you’re
aiming for if somebody tells you, “Be physically virtuosic and skillful.” But
it’s easy to know what to do when somebody tells you, “Put the ball through
the hoop.”
There is a board game called Imperial , which I love beyond measure. It is
also, thematically, spectacularly evil. The game is set during World War I.
All the great European powers are fighting it out on the board—the German
Empire, Great Britain, France, Austria-Hungary. They are fighting it out in
what looks like a perfectly ordinary board game of war. There are little
army pieces and navy pieces that move around and fight each other, and
little factory pieces that let countries build those armies and navies.
Except you don’t play as the countries. Each of the players takes the role
of a shadowy investor behind the scenes, investing in the various countries
and manipulating the course of the war for their own profit. You control any
country you have the most invested in, but control can shift. More
important, the scoring system is about how much your investments are
worth, not whether your countries win the war. This leads to some truly evil
strategies, like starting a war between two countries you own to make a
profit.
It captures a mindset not of total war, but of watching and manipulating
shared incentives. The first time I felt I truly understood the game was when
I realized how the players’ interests and motivations were deeply separate
from the countries’ interests. On our first play, before we had really come to
terms with how the game was asking us to play, we were all playing it like a

## Página 121

regular war game, like Risk . Each of us invested mostly in one country and
tried to win the war with that country. At one point, I was heavily invested
in Great Britain, and another player, Sarah, was heavily invested in Austria-
Hungary. I could see that Austria-Hungary was gearing up to attack Great
Britain. And I thought a war was inevitable.
Until I realized that the right move was not for Sarah and me to fight it
out. Instead, I let her have some cheap stock in Britain. This meant I had
less control of Britain, and Britain’s profits were now split between Sarah
and me. But it also meant we were coinvested in Britain, and she no longer
had much reason to direct Austria-Hungary to attack Britain—because she
now, in fact, owned a third of Britain.
The game simulates a Machiavellian mindset, but one that is oriented
toward watching and manipulating shared incentives. And it trained a part
of my brain that I still use, every time I’m in some university meeting,
fighting for the life of the philosophy department against the systematic
defunding of humanities programs. Imperial trained me in this mode of
getting people to do what you want by giving them a piece of the action.
And it’s not just training some technical skill. Imperial gave me a whole
outlook, a whole attentional focus—zeroed in on studying and manipulating
the structure of shared incentives.
This isn’t, obviously, the only way to get those skills and perspectives—
just as reading literature isn’t the only way to gain empathy and sensitivity.
You can do it by living life, learning hard lessons from grim experience, and
talking to people. And recipes aren’t the only way to learn to cook—you
can do it by apprenticing yourself to a master, or through trial and error. But
games, literature, and recipes are all very convenient communicative
packages, which crystallize different parts of human life into highly
accessible and portable forms. Games aren’t the only way to expand your
agency, but they’re a particularly sharp and quick way of encoding agency
—of writing it down, storing it, and passing it on to new people. And at the
heart of many games is a mechanical scoring system, because a mechanical
scoring system makes radically different values accessible to anybody .
Games are a way of writing down different practical perspectives. Games
let us communicate new modes of agency. And mechanical scoring systems
are at their center because they let us easily communicate goals and values.
Scoring systems can be used to explore alternate selves. Games are a library
of agency.

## Página 122

I LEARNED THE BEST WAY OF UNDERSTANDING THE WEIRD RELATIONSHIP between
rigid rules and deep flexibility from a yoga teacher. She would rattle off
these incredibly precise movement cues, telling us to lift our chest like a
line was pulling it straight toward the ceiling, to arch our back like a cat and
send a wave up our spine, rolling up one vertebra at a time. Sometimes I’d
rebel or my mind would wander, and I’d just vaguely make some random
movement instead of doing exactly what she said. And she’d scold me. She
said the whole problem was that so many of us were trapped in old habits,
in unthinking movement patterns. We tended to stand the same way, to
hunch in the same way, to get trapped in a rut of our habitual posture.
The precision of the yoga poses, she said, forces you out of your ruts. It
prevents you from falling into the same habits of motion. The restrictions
force you out of unthinking repetition and into a new pattern of movement.
The strictness of a yoga pose is exactly what helps you build fluidity,
because it pushes you to explore something new. The precise specification
of a yoga pose is a cage in the short term, but freeing in the long term.
Games are like that, but for action and values. In a game, the rigid rules
and scoring system force you into a new mode of valuing, and a new mode
of action. Soccer rules say you need to score goals without using your
hands, and so suddenly you’re plunged into seeing how much you can
control a ball with your feet. Rock climbing rules say you have to go up, but
without pulling on a rope. So now you are pushed into discovering exactly
how much you can do just by refining your balance and controlling the
precise angle of your fingers and toes.
Games are yoga for your agency.

## Página 123