# 5. The Art of Agency

## CHAPTER 5

The Art of Agency
hat functions do scoring systems serve in games?
Say we’ve just gotten a new board game for Christmas. We
W know nothing about it yet. We open it up and dump all the pieces
in a jumble—some are yellow, some are green, some are red, some are
shaped like little barnyard animals. Then we read the rules, and the game
tells us that the yellow pieces are worth one point each, the little wooden
cows are worth twenty points, and the red pieces are worth minus-five
points.
Freeze-frame on this exact moment. It is a moment so familiar that we
can miss its utter weirdness. Because when we read the rules of the game,
we discover what we are going to desire in the game. The scoring system
sets our in-game motivations with precision. It tells us exactly what we
need to do—what will count as success. One game tells us to collect little
wooden sheep; another game tells us to make more money; another tells us
to take over the world. And many of us can just throw ourselves into the
game, to acquire an intense desire for whatever we’re told to desire. I can
get so into it that my armpits sweat and my heart races at the prospect of
getting a couple more wooden cows. And then the game ends; we throw all
those pieces into a pile and scoop it back into the box, because they don’t
matter anymore.
Games set our desires. But why would we ever want to let them? Why do
we let external systems, designed by other people, muck around with our
psychologies? To answer that question, we need to get a better grip on the
essential nature of games. And I mean “game” really broadly here. Fly-
fishing, rock climbing, Portal , The Mind , basketball, The Legend of Zelda ,
Starcraft II , chess—these are all games to me. We need to understand the

## Página 55

crucial role of designed, artificial goals in creating the structured play of
games.
The best philosophical account of games I know of is in Bernard Suits’s
1
book The Grasshopper: Games, Life and Utopia —a hidden treasure of
philosophy about what games are and why we play them. In it, Suits gives
us a definition of games. Here is what he calls the “portable version” of the
definition:
To play a game is to voluntarily take on unnecessary obstacles to
make possible the activity of struggling to overcome them.
In games, you’re always trying to succeed in some way—to hit some
specified goal. You’re trying to cross the finish line, collect sheep, kill more
zombies, catch more fish, or last longer at Tetris . But here’s Suits’s key
insight: When you’re playing a game, you’re not trying to achieve that goal
in the most efficient way possible. Recreational anglers don’t just care
about catching fish. If all they wanted was to have some fish, they’d use the
most efficient method: a net, or maybe dynamite. Commercial fishermen
use nets because that’s the most efficient method to quickly extract fish. But
it’s not particularly fun. So recreational anglers use a very inefficient but
enjoyable method: They try to catch a fish specifically by tricking it into
biting a hook. You can’t just net it; you have to fool it.
A game sets two artificialities. It declares a goal for you to pursue. And
then it sets extra, unnecessary constraints in your path to that goal. So why
would we possibly want to do that? The answer, says Suits, is that together
these goals and constraints shape a new kind of activity. So what we care
about in games is not the outcome by itself. We care about achieving that
outcome by a certain inefficient path. In games, he says, we care about
going the long way . We care about getting to the goal in a particular way,
using a particular method.
If we cared only about the goal by itself—plain and disconnected from
constraints—we’d just take the most efficient path. If all we cared about
was getting the ball through the basketball hoop, we’d use a stepladder. But
we don’t, because the goal of making baskets has no value separate from
the constraints. Making baskets is valuable only if we’re doing it under
certain restrictions—no ropes, no ladders, no trampolines. These restrictions
force us to use a particular method: dribbling and jumping and throwing the

## Página 56

ball. So the method—jumping and throwing—must be an essential part of
the value of making baskets.
Another way to put it, for Suits, is that the goal in the game is partially
constituted by the constraints . It doesn’t even count as achieving the goal if
you don’t do it following the rules. Let’s say you’re running a marathon.
The goal is to cross the finish line. Technically, the finish line is at the
entrance to Central Park. But crossing it isn’t just getting to that point in
space. Otherwise you’d use a bike or call an Uber. But if you used a bike or
an Uber, you wouldn’t be running a marathon, and you wouldn’t have
crossed the finish line. To cross the finish line is to get to that spot while
obeying a particular set of constraints. Game goals are social constructs;
following the rules is an essential part of their being.
In games, the value of the outcome is inseparable from the value of the
process .
SUITS GIVES A DEFINITION OF GAMES, BUT HE ALSO GIVES US A whole vision of
what games are for—and why we would ever choose to submit ourselves to
unnecessary constraints and external goals. Games create new kinds of
action for you to savor.
Games sculpt action with incredible precision. Human beings are tool
users, but the rules of rock climbing force us out of our technological heads.
These rules drive you into your body, tell you to forget about using ladders
and ropes. Instead, you discover how much you can accomplish just by
becoming ever more precise with your foot placements, by being subtler
with your balance and core tension.
Non-climbers will often find these rules arbitrary. Why not just pull
yourself up with the rope? It’ll make it so much easier! The answer is that
you could haul yourself up with a rope, but then you’d be playing a
different game. In fact, there’s an older style of climbing that lets you do
exactly that. It’s called aid climbing, and it has very different rules. You’re
allowed to stick gear into the walls and cracks and then dangle various
platforms and rope ladders from it, and you climb your way up on all that
gear. The most common form of climbing in the modern era is free
climbing, in which you don’t touch the rope to go up, using only your hands
and feet on the rock. (Free climbing is commonly confused with free solo
climbing, which is the much more dangerous business of using no safety

## Página 57

ropes at all. In free climbing, you have a rope, but it’s only for safety, to
catch you in case you fall.)
Free climbing mostly displaced aid climbing because the increased
limitations create, for most climbers, a much more interesting form of
activity. Aid climbing involves fairly repetitive movement. Because you’re
allowed to use rope ladders, you end up mostly ignoring the rock face and
just climbing the ladder. The game of aid climbing is mostly about studying
the rock to find places to insert the gear. Once you’ve stuck your rope
ladder in the wall, going up is relatively straightforward.
Free climbing, on the other hand, orders you not to use the rope to
ascend. This forces you to study and use the tiny features of the rock itself,
which makes every different piece of rock its own special challenge. The
climb might force you to invent some new technique for jamming your toe
in, to find some new way of shimmying your hips and delicately balancing
over to get that next hold. Free climbing forces you to tune into subtle
variations in the rock and then come up with a new set of moves, carefully
adapted to the particular and specific features of the rock in front of you.
This is what the activity of rock climbing is made of. We set a goal of
ascending rock, combined with a limitation on using gear to do so. We
forbid, in fact, the tools that would let you ignore the details of the rock,
that would reduce different rock faces to more similar problems. The rules
force you to confront the differences in rock. Together, that goal and those
limitations create an activity of subtle attention and creative movement in
response to the infinite varieties of rock.
To outsiders, the rules of climbing might seem pretty arbitrary. The rules
of free climbing forbid the use of ropes and spikes to advance, but they do
permit the use of modern climbing shoes. High-end climbing shoes are like
ballet-slipper corsets for your feet. They force-squeeze your feet into an
arched, downturn shape, turning them into sharpened claws. And they’re
covered in sticky rubber, optimized to cling to little bits of rock. This can
seem, to a skeptical outsider, incoherent. Why allow some kinds of
technology, like high-tech climbing shoes, but not others, like rope ladders
that you can stick into the rock? If you’re allowed fancy climbing shoes,
which make climbing easier, why not rope ladders or grappling hooks?
Where’s the logical consistency?
With striving play, we pick the goals and restrictions of games in order to
engineer a particular quality of action. If you’re allowed to use a grappling

## Página 58

hook, it decreases the variety of motion you need to use to climb. But fancy
climbing shoes, coated with sticky rubber, actually increase the variety of
possible movements. They let you hook more tightly into tiny dimples of
rock. This makes some climbs easier, but it also opens up whole new kinds
of climbs, on terrain that was formerly impossible—steeper climbs, on
heavily overhung cliffs and even cave roofs. And this introduces a whole
new realm of cool-ass movement in overhanging terrain, where you cling
like a bat to a roof, doing all kinds of clever foot jams and gymnastic twists
and flips.
The thing about modern climbing shoes is they don’t just make the
activity of climbing easier and therefore less interesting. They are a
technological improvement that expand the possibility space, letting you
climb new kinds of terrain. Modern, high-tech climbing shoes, though they
make any particular climb easier, also open up whole new vistas of
interesting climbing.
So why do we permit high-tech climbing shoes but not grappling hooks?
The answer is that game design is not a matter of pure logic, but an art. It is
about experimenting with the medium, trying out different things and
seeing the result. Painters use brushstrokes, color, and shading; poets use
words, rhythm, and images. And the game designer, as part of their art, uses
rules, scorings systems, and constraints, adding and subtracting and
tweaking until they get the feel they want out of the game.
Some people praise games that tell stories, that have good graphics or
good dialogue. They praise games that are like movies—I think because
movies are a more established and familiar form of art. But that’s selling
games short. The game designer isn’t just telling stories or creating worlds.
They can certainly do those things, but they’re also doing something more,
something unique. The game designer creates new selves for us to inhabit.
They create an action skeleton —with a specified set of motivations and
abilities—and then turn that engineered self loose in an engineered world.
Game designers shape a new self for us, and when we play their games, we
slip into that designed alternate self, and we experience new kinds of action.
Games are an art form that work in the medium of agency itself . Games
are the art of agency. And scoring systems are the engines that drive that
alternate, designed agency.

## Página 59