# 2. Striving Play

## CHAPTER 2

Striving Play
t was the pandemic. I was in Utah, and I was learning to fly-fish to keep
myself from falling down a despair hole. Fly-fishing was exactly what I
I needed in my life at that moment—in my forties, overloaded with
parenting and admin. And it was exactly what I needed during lockdown. I
was spending most of my days stuck in an improvised home office in my
basement, trying to Zoom-teach to a screen full of blank boxes. But when
you’re out there, standing in a river, staring intently into the details of
moving water—it cleans out your brain and soul.
Fly-fishing is full of dudes who have this intense, addictive relationship
to the sport. My own private theory is that what a lot of these guys need is
meditation, but they can’t admit it. Fly-fishing gives them a sufficiently
masculine cover story, so they can get the spiritual cleansing they really
need.
For me, the peak of fly-fishing is dry fly-fishing. This is when you’re
fishing with a tiny imitation insect, which floats, and you’re trying to get a
fish to eat your fly off the surface of the water. Fly-fishing is an act of
perpetual attention to the natural world. You’re stalking along the river,
looking for signs of fish. Maybe you spot a subtly slow patch of water
behind an underwater boulder—classic trout holding water. Or maybe, if
you’re lucky enough and watchful enough, you’ll actually see a trout
daintily feeding on the surface. Your goal now is to sneak up behind it and
carefully cast your artificial fly to land, ever so softly, right in front of that
trout. And if you actually manage to pull all this off, then sometimes the
trout will swim up, inspect your floating fly, and slurp it down right there in
front of you.
You net the fish, admire it briefly—and then you let it go. Because most
fly-fishers don’t fish for food; they catch and release. Taking fish was never

## Página 27

the point. In fact, Nicole, one of the people who taught me to fly-fish, had
even transcended the catching part. She told me that she’d started feeling
bad enough about bothering fish, especially during the spawning season,
that she’d sometimes cut the hook off her fly, and just try to get the trout to
eat the fly. Fooling the trout was enough; actually hooking and netting the
fish had become unnecessary for her version of the game.
For me, the central experience of fly-fishing is a sensual act of
information management. You’re looking at tiny details of the river,
watching for the telltale signs of good trout holding water. There’s the slow
water that shelters the fish; the crisp current edges that bring them food.
You’re searching for little shadowy movement in the water—the subtle
sway of camouflaged trout. And then you have to show them the right bug.
When trout see a lot of fishing pressure, they get picky. So you have to
study the insects, notice their color and size, and change your fly to match.
In fly-fishing, you become a nexus point in this gorgeously overwhelming
flow of information. You have to dance through it all, sorting the signal
from the noise.
But this isn’t only a superficial cover for meditation. If I just stood in a
river and tried to clear my mind, I’d get pretty bored, fast. I can’t simply
will myself to focus on the surface of water. The pursuit of fish creates an
attentional focal point. It structures the way I look at the river—it gives me
a goal, tells me what to look for, what to see. This intense, diffuse attention
produces in me a state of profoundly calm soft focus. Weirdly, taking on the
goal of catching fish has the result of meditation through attention to the
river.
The fly-fishing writer John Gierach often talks about the real point of fly-
fishing. You do have to be trying to catch fish—and hoping for a big one.
That goal organizes and energizes the whole activity. But catching fish isn’t
actually the point of the whole thing. This is particularly obvious for the
catch-and-release fly-fisher, who mostly lets their fish go. It doesn’t
actually matter how many fish you catch, or how big they are. You might hit
the river on a good day, monster fish jumping your fly on every cast. You
might hike up a quiet river, casting in little pool after little pool, and only
catch a few fish—but beautiful, wild ones. Or you might end up stuck all
day casting to one tricky fish, spooking them over and over with imperfect
casts, and finally fool the fish into hitting your fly once, only to miss the
strike. But all of these are good days. They are time beautifully spent

## Página 28

absorbed in the natural world—in careful movement, in fluid casting. The
fish are the focus, but not the value of the activity. The real point is
something larger, stranger, more mystical. You spend time on a river trying
to catch fish, and you start noticing the slow cycle of different bugs
throughout the day. You start noticing that the first hatch of mayflies tends
to match the appearance of the hummingbirds, that wild asparagus will
show up for a week in early spring. You start getting a feel for the rhythm
and cycle of a river’s ecosystem. The natural world is suddenly higher
1
resolution. Catching fish is the goal —but not the purpose —of fly-fishing.
Gierach is a striving player.
2
THERE ARE TWO VERY DIFFERENT MOTIVATIONAL STATES IN which we can play
a game. There’s striving play, and then there’s also achievement play . The
achievement player is trying to win because they actually value winning.
The striving player, on the other hand, doesn’t actually care about the win,
deep down. They are only trying to win because they value the struggle.
The achievement player cares about the win itself ; the striving player cares
about the process of trying to win .
The achievement player, we might say, genuinely wants to win. They
have a lasting interest in winning; their desire to win exists before, during,
and after the game. It is the reason they play; playing games is valuable for
them only if they win.
The striving player is different. They don’t truly care about winning—not
cosmically. They care about something else: fun, relaxation, a challenge, the
experience of beautiful movement. But to get those cherished experiences,
they need to get themselves into the mental state of wanting to win. Their
interest in winning, however, is only temporary. They may get themselves
to want to win pretty intensely during the game, but they throw away their
interest in winning once they finish the game. Their real, lasting purpose
lies in the struggle. For striving players, winning is a disposable end .
Striving play might sound weird described this abstractly, but you’ve
probably already been doing it instinctively already. Say we’re having a
dinner party and decide to play a party game. Let’s play Spyfall , a truly
delightful game of hidden identities that reliably puts people into joyful
hysterics. One person is the spy, trying to beat everybody else. Everybody
else is on a team together, trying to figure out who the spy is. But, of

## Página 29

course, since the spy’s identity is hidden, none of the team players can be
sure who, exactly, they can trust.
There is, for each round, a single specified location, which you’re all
supposed to be in together. Maybe you’re all in a post office, or an opera
house, or a submarine. You start the game by dealing out a card to each
player, which assigns them a role: team player or spy. The team players
each get similar cards, telling them all the same key fact: the location. But
the spy’s card does not reveal that location; it only says “SPY.” The team
players know the location, but they can’t be sure who their real team
members are, and who the spy is. The spy player knows everybody’s true
role, but not the location. Now the dance begins. If the spy figures out the
specified location, then the spy wins. But if the team players figure out who
the spy is, then the team wins. And now you all just talk—asking each other
probing questions. (“When’d you get here? Hey, how long have you been
working here? What’s that in your hand?”) The team players need to signal
to each other that they’re on the team, by hinting at their knowledge of the
location. But they can’t be too obvious about it, or the spy will figure out
the location. (If the location is the opera house, a team player shouldn’t just
ask, “What’d you think of that last aria?” That gives away too much
information to the spy.)
The whole game is a ludicrous dance in ambiguity, bullshit, and bullshit
detection. Team players have to be hyper-attentive. They’re trying to invent
clever little litmus tests to figure out who’s in the know, and who’s only
pretending. They have to signal to each other their true knowledge, but hide
those signals under strategic vagueness. The spy has the reverse task. They
have to speak ambiguously. They have to pretend that they’re being
strategically vague about the secret location, when they actually just don’t
know what it is. They have to issue fake litmus tests to the team players, to
probe for the information they need.
The fun of the game—the thrills, the cleverly pointed questions, the
glorious escapes—depends on the players caring about winning. Otherwise,
you don’t get pulled into the intricate dance of the game; you won’t have a
reason to put every one of your fellow players’ questions and answers under
the microscope. You need to care about winning so you’ll feel the tension,
and the thrill when it all comes together and you finally figure it out.
But then one side loses and the other wins. The winner has a moment of
glee, the losers hang their head for a second. But that moment passes as we

## Página 30

leave the mindset of the game. Because in the long run, it doesn’t really
matter who won. From outside the game, most of us don’t actually care if
we won or lost—unless we’re hypercompetitive assholes. Our interest in
winning evaporates quickly. If you lost, you don’t think you wasted your
evening. What actually matters is that people had fun. Most of us naturally
engage in striving play, with party games like Spyfall .
The achievement player is more psychologically straightforward. They
care about winning, and then they try hard to get it. They have normal linear
desires. But the striving player has a much odder motivational structure.
There is an angle in their desires; their desires turn a corner. A striving
player wants the experience of struggling to overcome obstacles. They want
the absorption, the intensity, or the drama. They don’t actually care about
winning, but they do care about experiences that come from trying hard to
win . But to get those experiences, they have to temporarily get themselves
to want to win. But their interest in winning isn’t permanent. It’s just
something they induce in themselves for the moment—a little mental trick
that they play on themselves, in order to get that delightful struggle.
Striving play involves a motivational inversion. In ordinary, practical life,
you take the means for the sake of the end. You struggle in order to get the
reward; all your effort and strain is justified by the outcome. But in striving
play, you take the end for the sake of the means. You chase the goal in order
to have the struggle. If you want to understand the achievement player’s
motivation, you have to look at the value of winning for them. But to
understand the striving player, you have to look at the joy of the struggle
itself.
Maybe you’re a striving player, or maybe you’re more of an achievement
player. Many of us fall somewhere in between. And we often shift in
different contexts. Here’s a litmus test: If you’re in the striving play
mindset, you can get what you want out of a game even if you lose. And
you can fail to get what you really want even if you win. I can lose Spyfall
and be utterly satisfied by how fun the whole thing was. Or I can win—but
have been so viciously competitive that I’d ruined the fun for everybody. I
may have achieved the in-game goal, but I failed at my real purpose for
playing.
And notice that striving players don’t just have to be in it for the sheer
joy of the game. You can also be a striving player if you’re using the game
as a tool to get something else. You can play games for health or relaxation

## Página 31

or to break the ice at a party. But a striving player gets those benefits from
the struggle, not the victory. If you run marathons to improve your
cardiovascular fitness, you’re also a striving player—because you can get a
fitness benefit even if you place last.
Maybe you doubt that striving play is real. But a lot of ordinary, everyday
game-playing behavior only makes sense as striving play. For example,
when I’m playing serious board games with my friends, I will pursue the
win intensely during the game. But in the long term, I make choices that
actually decrease my chances of winning.
I play a lot of board games with my spouse. We love exploring weird new
games together. We have very different gaming skills, though. She’s a
chemist, and incredibly good at precision work, especially involving spatial
manipulation. Anything that requires, say, Tetris -like mental geometry, she
will destroy me at. And I am, to be perfectly honest, very good at games of
deception and social manipulation. In most games, one of us is usually way
better than the other.
But once in a while, we’ll find a game that balances our different skill
sets—a game that involves both precision geometry and deception. Now
we’re even; now we can have genuinely tense, fascinating matches. But
then, late at night, I’ll be wandering the internet, reading about the game,
and I’ll stumble across a strategy guide. My spouse would never read a
strategy guide; that’s not the kind of person she is. So if I read the strategy
guide, my skill at the game will jump way ahead of hers and I’ll start
winning—but our games will lose their delicious balance and be much less
exciting.
If there were no such thing as striving play—if we were all only
achievement players—then there would be only one rational thing to do:
Read the strategy guide and win. But in this case, I don’t read the strategy
guide—and I think that’s a perfectly reasonable thing for me to do. What I
truly care about is not the win, but the quality of the struggle. And that
makes sense only if I’m a striving player.
Consider, too, a stupid game . A stupid game is one in which:

## 1. The fun part is failing.

## 2. It’s only fun if you’re trying to win.

## Página 32

Twister is a stupid game. So are many drinking games. My favorite stupid
game is called Bag on Your Head. Bag on Your Head is a gloriously idiotic
party game in which everybody puts a brown paper grocery bag over their
head. The goal is to take the bags off of other people’s heads. Once
somebody takes the bag off your head, you’re out. The game involves
stumbling around, unable to see, bumping into furniture and people, and
then getting into awkward flailing matches trying to rip the bag off each
other’s’ heads. When you lose, you go stand by the side of the room and
watch the rest of this ridiculous game play out. And the best part: At some
point, there will be only one person left in the middle of the room,
stumbling around by themselves, flailing about, groping for their
nonexistent competitors. This is the winner. And the very best part of the
game is for the losers, who get to watch how long it takes for the winner to
figure out that they have, in fact, won.
Trying for a hard reach in Twister and then falling over into a heap—
that’s funny. But it wouldn’t be as funny if we fell on purpose. That’s
because what’s funny here is failure, and it’s only a failure if you were
actually trying to succeed. So the perverse logic of a stupid game is: You
have to get yourself invested in something that you don’t actually, from a
cosmic perspective, care about. You have to genuinely try to win in order to
get what you really want, which is hilarious failure.
In stupid games, the goal and purpose are entirely different. Stupid games
prove that striving play is real.
MOST CASUAL VIDEO GAME PLAYERS ARE, I THINK, STRIVING players. I’m not
talking about professional esports players, whose careers depend on
success. I’m talking about the average person, like me, who picks a
computer game because they think it’ll be fun or interesting.
I’ve been obsessed lately with the kinds of action video games that put
you at the edge of your reflexes, that overload you with too many enemies,
forcing you to defocus. The most beautiful of these games is Hyper Light
Drifter , a moody and brutally hard game of reflexes and rhythm. Hyper
Light Drifter is set in the ruins of a postapocalyptic world. It is a quiet
game, entirely free of dialogue. You play an enigmatic drifter, who appears
on the scene sick—clutching his heart, coughing up blood. You wander
mostly empty, quiet landscapes—until, in sudden rushes, the screen fills

## Página 33

with swarms of enemies. You have to dash, dodge, parry bullets with your
light-sword, shooting and slashing your way through the enemy swarms.
The enemies move in patterns, each in their own rhythm, flitting and
dashing around and then lunging for you. The game will feed you a few
enemies in small numbers, giving you a moment to internalize the pattern.
And then it will send them at you in droves, more than you can track with
your conscious mind. You have to learn to dance through them instinctively,
to find little emerging gaps and holes in the enemy patterns to weave
through, as you dodge and slash.
And it all happens to music—the heartbeat rhythm of lushly bittersweet,
pulsating electronic music. And the game works better if you tune in to its
music. Because the secret of the game is that the enemies and the music are
subtly synchronized to that heartbeat pulse, and if you let yourself get
carried away by the music, you can suddenly find yourself dodging and
dancing in gorgeous, electrifying synchronicity. (Alx Preston, the creator of
Hyper Light Drifter , has spent a lifetime struggling with heart disease,
under the constant threat of death. And he made a profoundly sad game
about loss and isolation, all built around a heartbeat rhythm.)
I have not finished Hyper Light Drifter . I suspect I will never come close
to beating this game. I am, in fact, terrible at games like this. If I actually
want to win, I should play a different game—something I’m actually good
at, like some slow, calculating turn-based game of optimizing economic
systems. I certainly shouldn’t play Hyper Light Drifter . But I do play it,
because I don’t really care about winning. I love the way the game makes
me stretch my consciousness, how it forces me to give up on my rational
brain and just become this reacting thing, tuning in to the particular hidden
pulse of each scene and letting my fingers dance to it. I care about the very
specific kind of attention, the kind of mental acuity, the absorption in the
flow, that trying to win pulls out of me. But I have to try to win—to actually
get myself invested in the win—to experience that luscious flow.
A FRIEND OF MINE TOLD ME ABOUT A GAME OF MONOPOLY HE once played with
his ten-year-old son. The son was winning for the first time in his life. The
dad had been on the brink of defeat for hours, but he never quite lost and he
didn’t understand exactly why. And then the dad discovered that whenever
he was about to run out of cash, his son would distract him and reverse-

## Página 34

cheat and sneak some extra money into the dad’s pile , so the game could
keep going. The son was trying to stay there forever, perched in that
glorious moment of total domination over his helpless dad.
It’s funny because what the son was doing makes a certain amount of
sense. The son actually got the basic spirit of striving play. He knew that he
was playing Monopoly for the joy of the struggle. But he misunderstood the
subtler logic of striving play.
The son’s mistake was that he was acting too straightforwardly. He was
taking action directly to elongate the game. He was openly pursuing his
larger purpose of having an extended struggle, rather than just narrowly
devoting himself to the local goal of in-game victory. What striving players
actually need to do is much weirder and more complicated. We have a
larger purpose (having a cool struggle) and then we mostly forget about it.
We focus on a narrower local goal (winning). We internally seal ourselves
off from our larger purpose . The seal isn’t perfect, of course—if my
opponent starts crying, or just looks miserably bored, we break the seal. But
for the most part, we narrow our motivations during the game.
I love a long, challenging game of chess. My larger purpose is to
experience a fascinating extended, fraught battle. I’d be disappointed if I
achieved a quick, easy victory. But during the game itself, I can’t let that
larger purpose directly guide my in-game actions. I can’t openly pursue a
longer struggle, because then I’d have a reason to avoid making game-
winning moves. That would actually destroy the game experience for me. It
would lead to an awkward double consciousness, in which I’d somehow
have to be trying to win and trying to avoid winning at the same time.
This is a paradox at the heart of striving play. In a game like chess,
striving players want a prolonged, delicious fight. But the only way we can
get the feeling we want is by playing to shorten the fight—by constantly
trying to end the game as quickly and decisively as possible. To achieve our
true purpose, we need to ignore it and just focus on the narrower in-game
goal. We have to submerge ourselves in a simpler, alternate consciousness:
one that just wants to win.
We often use striving play to sneak up sideways on these delicate mental
states. A lot of the time, my true purpose in climbing is to relax. But if I aim
at relaxation directly—if I consciously try to relax—I’ll absolutely fail. The
worst way to do it is to sit in a chair and try to will yourself to relax. To
actually relax, I have to forget that I’m trying to relax. I have to put my true

## Página 35

purpose out of my head and focus on a very simple, very narrow goal: to
get to the top of the cliff.
Philosophers have a term for this kind of thing: a self-effacing end , which
is an end that cannot be pursued directly. Games help us achieve self-
effacing ends—relaxation, meditation, absorption—by providing us with
smaller goals to focus on. This is why people often use goofy games as
icebreakers. If you take a party full of awkward strangers and just tell them
to relax and get to know each other, they’ll probably fail. Social chill is a
self-effacing end. But if you give them some stupid game, like charades or
Twister , they actually might have some fun together.
A LOT OF PEOPLE THINK GAMES ARE A WASTE OF TIME—ALL THAT effort spent on
pursuing some silly, arbitrary points. But games look empty only if you’re
looking in the wrong place. In isolation, the goal of a game can seem utterly
absurd. A marathon runner goes in an enormous, exhausting circle to get to
the marathon’s finish line—which is one block over from where they
started. A board game player spends the whole night trying to collect more
wooden sheep than anybody else. And after hours of torturous effort, they
count up their respective piles of sheep, declare a victor, and then just toss
all those sheep back into the baggie. What the hell was it all for, anyway?
To understand why so many of us play games, you have to remember the
distinction between goal and purpose. For achievement players, the goal
and purpose are one: They want to win. But for striving players, goal and
purpose are very far apart. The in-game goal is just a disposable tool that
they use to approach their real purpose: the experience of that delicious
struggle.
And this difference between goal and purpose is everywhere, far beyond
games. For a lot of folks, the goal of knitting is to make scarves, but the
purpose is to be buried in this pleasurable zen dance of delicate finger
motions. And we can tell that scarves aren’t the true purpose, because a lot
of knitters end up with way more scarves than they could possibly need,
having to give them away to anybody who will take them.
Striving play is at one end of the spectrum of the possible relationships
we can have to scoring systems. In striving play, we adopt scoring systems
for our own reasons. We dally with them for as long as it takes to get what
we want. And then, when it’s done, we throw those cares away. In striving

## Página 36

play, we don’t let the scoring system dominate us. We use it to give us
focus, and to align our cares for a little while, so that we can abandon
ourselves to a gorgeously ordered, intense, purified world. We care about
points because they give us a particular thrill. The scoring system is just a
means to an end.
And if we don’t like a scoring system and what it’s doing to us, we can
just stop playing.

## Página 37