# 27. Art Is a Game

## CHAPTER 27

Art Is a Game
ames give us a hint about the shape of what we’re after, but they
aren’t magic. They are a seed—a starting point, from which to
G grope our way forward in the face of the Four Horsemen.
If metrics conceal the possibility of choice, then the response is exposure :
to encounter a greater variety of activities and values in the world.
If metrics push us to quickly dismiss new values alternatives, then the
response is openness : the attitude of paying attention and taking seriously
new alternatives.
If metrics push us to settle our minds, then the response is to explore : to
continually seek out new ideas, new experiences, and new kinds of
meaningfulness in the world.
These are the actions and psychological tendencies that help us to resist
intrusion by the Four Horsemen. But it’s hard. The price of holding on to
such attitudes—and the weirder values they push you toward—is rendering
yourself incomprehensible to the wider world. And there are so many forces
pulling in the opposite direction. Sheer willpower is rarely enough. We need
practices that will help us to resist the large-scale swamping, to keep it
small and particular when it’s necessary. We need habits of tailoring.
And those habits already exist. They have names like art, play, beauty,
games, irony, and comedy. We need established mindsets—package deals
that support these resistant tendencies, which help us to get exposure,
openness, and exploration. And I think, hovering at the edges of our entire
discussion, we have already seen two such packaged mindsets, built to
resist the Four Horsemen.
We’ve already talked about the first one: the spirit of playfulness .
Playfulness, as philosopher María Lugones put it, is the capacity to step
lightly between rule sets, to cross easily between social worlds. Playfulness

## Página 228

is a package of attitudes perfect for opposing the Four Horsemen. It is the
spirit of exploring the world in an open-minded way, trying on different
forms of life.
The world is constantly beating the playfulness out of us, and the sheer
spirit isn’t enough. We need practices—rituals, structured activities, and
communities to support them—that push us toward playfulness. Lugones
herself frowned on the more orderly, strict rule sets of formalized games,
precisely because they were too close to those other rigid, dogmatic forms
of life. She was more interested in the fluidness and unstructuredness of
pure, creative, lighthearted play.
But if I’m right, then there is something profoundly useful and deep
about formalized games, when approached with the right attitude. They let
us play around with rigidity —to try on explicit rule sets and mechanical
scoring systems and then step back from them. Games might even act as a
kind of spiritual vaccine, an inoculation against the harsher institutional
scoring systems that they resemble. Vaccines work by introducing your
body to a safer imitation of the real thing, so your body will learn to deal
with it. Games might do the same for your soul. Games let you practice
fluidity with rigid rule systems—slipping into and out of them. And they
enable this best when they have no teeth, when there is no real-world
punishment for getting bored with and then abandoning a game.
Games are toy governments, but for fun.
BUT IT DOESN’T HAVE TO BE THAT WAY. YOU CAN ALSO USE MECHANICAL local
goals to steer toward equally mechanical larger purposes. You can play
games as part of your devotion to some larger, rigid scoring system. You
could run marathons only to lose weight; you could play logic games only
to improve your SAT scores. What matters isn’t just that we’re playing a
game, but the quality of light that guides our game-playing.
And the form of game-playing that seems most resistant to value capture
and value collapse is aesthetic striving play. In aesthetic striving play, we
control our mechanical scoring system in light of some larger,
nonmechanical purpose, like my playing around with my goals in fishing to
find which one will give me the most meditative trance. Or trying out
different role-playing games and house-rule variations until we find the one
that sparks the most raucous creative fizz. In aesthetic striving play, the

## Página 229

local goal is explicit and mechanical, but the larger purpose is fuzzy and
dynamic.
Aesthetic striving play is particularly powerful, because it connects the
spirit of playfulness with another resistant mindset: the spirit of art . There’s
an old thought from Kant on the philosophy of art: We approach art with a
different attitude and a different frame of mind. Jerome Stolnitz puts it this
way: In art, we view the world impractically.
In ordinary life, we approach the world with a practical frame of mind.
We want particular things; we approach the world with preconceived goals.
When I’m car shopping, I focus on size and safety, fuel efficiency and price.
But I barely notice how the car looks—how sporty or cool it is—or how it
feels. For me, a car is just a means to get me to other things that I want or
need: work, grocery shopping, camping trips. Everything else gets filtered
out.
Most of the time we approach the world with a practical attitude. Our
preset interests narrow our attention. But when we approach the world
aesthetically, says Stolnitz, we open up. We approach without any particular
goals or interests. So for a moment, our vision becomes unfiltered. We see
things as they fully are, for their own sake. And this makes it far more likely
that we will be surprised by the world. This is where we are most likely to
notice things that are far outside the normal filtered world of our own
1
practical needs. We let the world take the lead and teach us what’s
valuable in it—what’s beautiful in ways we hadn’t known could be
beautiful.
We can adopt this aesthetic attitude toward official art, but it’s not just
confined to the museum. You can take up the aesthetic attitude toward
nature, toward cozy neighborhood parks, toward ordinary household tools
—toward literally anything. For Stolnitz, the aesthetic attitude was for open
seeing; you could take that attitude toward everything, everywhere.
You might have had an experience like this: There’s some object you use
daily. Maybe it’s a coffee thermos. It does its job well; it’s a good tool. But
one day you’re holding it and you notice something else: It’s a particularly
lovely shade of deep red. And the texture is nice and nubbly; it feels like a
tiny fine-grained riverbed. So you sit there and stroke your coffee thermos
like a lunatic and just enjoy the feel of it. The thermos is, in its own quiet
way, beautiful.

## Página 230

You might have had this weird shift in vision with people, too. It’s easy
to get into a networking mindset. You go into a room full of people with one
thought in your head: What can these people do for me? You sort them
based on how they can serve your interests. Powerful people, people with
the right connections or corporate position—they matter. People who can’t
do anything for you: worthless. Ignore them. This is a kind of narrowed
practical attitude.
But we can shift out of it. We can approach people without that filter and
be open to what delights each new person might have to offer. Maybe this
person has a weird obsession with gathering and replanting wild ferns in
their backyard. That’s cool; you didn’t even know that was a thing. Maybe
that person has some incredible stories to tell about completely falling to
pieces after a bad breakup and then pulling themselves together when they
got obsessed with fixing their city’s terrible zoning laws. Maybe this weird-
looking guy with food in his beard has spent years working on a very
thorough and heartfelt theory about why Nicolas Cage is the greatest artistic
genius of our era. You’ll find out, if you let them take the lead.
Value collapse is the ultimate version of narrowed vision, which arises
from defining your goal with hyper-precision. The aesthetic attitude is the
opposite: It opens you up, because it is approaching the world without clear
goals in mind. The aesthetic attitude is an antidote to value collapse.
IN THE MODERN WORLD, WE ARE CONSTANTLY DEPLOYING A kind of summary,
quickened vision—an abstracted vision that classifies things as quickly as it
can, slots them into our larger beliefs about how things like that work, and
then stops looking. Call it category vision . When we look at the world, we
don’t look at every detail. Say you’re in the grocery store shopping for
pasta. You’re constantly categorizing and deleting. You categorize some of
those things as people and you step around them politely. You categorize
some of those things as crackers and bread; those don’t matter today, so you
move on. This thing I’m holding in my hand is spaghetti, which is all I need
to know, so I’ll buy it. Categories are a way to quickly sort the world,
dismiss most of it, and process the rest.
But there’s also a downside: Category vision is efficient because it
harnesses the power of categories to let us skip looking at the details of the
world . And that basic technique works particularly well where the world is

## Página 231

flat, regular, and stable. But it will be far less useful where local variances
and individual peculiarities are important. And it is definitely not the right
mindset if what we want is to be absorbed in the glory of looking and
feeling, for ourselves, all the wondrous details of the world.
The philosopher John Dewey put it this way: There is a difference
between recognition and perception . When we recognize something, we put
it in a category, and we stop there. If all I need is a pencil, once I see that
this thing is a pencil, I stop looking at it and start using it. But perception
keeps going; it keeps searching, seeing, finding. It’s inefficient, but
delightful.
IF WE WERE TRYING TO BE EFFICIENT ABOUT GETTING THE RIGHT beliefs about
art, we shouldn’t go to the museum by ourselves, or listen to music by
ourselves. We shouldn’t decide for ourselves. If our goal is just efficiency,
then we should treat art like science. There is a faster way to get the right
beliefs about art: Find art experts and trust them. But we avoid it. And there
is a fast way to get good art: Don’t bother trying to learn to make it
yourself, just copy some master. But we avoid that, too. A lot of the time,
we try to make new art ourselves, even when there is already more great art
than we could look at in ten lifetimes. I still sit at home and play guitar with
my spouse, and sing for our friends—even though there are a thousand
better recordings of better singers and musicians just a button-tap away.
This all might start to sound a little familiar. What is art but doing things
the hard way? Instead of taking the most efficient path, we take on artificial
constraints. We insist on doing things for ourselves, for the sake of having a
particular process of struggling. We avoid shortcuts so we can be plunged
into the process of looking, interpreting, and feeling for ourselves. And
we’ve set up the rules to avoid being able to terminate arguments by
deferring to some external authority. This would be strange if it were a
science. But it’s not strange at all in a game, because the point of many
games is to get us buried in endless delightful struggles, with the world and
with each other.
Art is a game. And like a lot of games, it’s been designed to let us
exercise those parts of us that have begun to wither in the modern world.
It’s a reminder of what life is like when it is deeply disorganized and we’re
free to revel in that disorder. Art is a game that we built to give us relief

## Página 232

from the ruthless efficiencies of the Four Horsemen. It is a game whose
rules lead to endless tasty disagreements about strange, subtle objects. And
it wouldn’t make any sense if you thought the point of the game was just to
finish the conversation as quickly as possible and get the right answer. But
the game does make sense if the point is to be buried in the act of seeing,
looking, thinking, and feeling for its own sake—and if we want to be buried
in the joy of endless disagreements with our friends about what we are
seeing and feeling for ourselves.
This all might help to explain, by the way, the violently different
responses people have had to algorithmic and AI art. I’m talking about
those generative tools that do the art-making work for you. Why are some
people so excited by their convenience and others utterly repulsed? If you
thought that the point of art was to generate, as efficiently as possible,
enormous piles of pleasant-looking pictures about any topic you chose, then
algorithmic art might sound like a good deal. If the point of art is to
maximize productivity—to make lots of art quickly and cheaply—then
algorithmic art is a good shortcut.
But if you thought that the point of art was the exercise of human
creativity, then algorithmic art is a disaster. If the point of art is to be
engaged in the activity of making it and appreciating it—if the point of art
is to be buried in the process, to be doing it yourself, using your own
emotions and invention and sensitivity to fine-tune every detail—then
algorithmic art is cheating . And not cheating in some boring, legalistic
sense but cheating in the cosmic sense. By using algorithmic art-generation
tools, we are cheating ourselves out of one of the most precious activities
we have left. As Bernard Suits puts it, cheaters don’t actually understand the
point of playing games. They don’t understand that the constraints are there
to shape a beautiful activity of doing it yourself. Art is a site of human
activity and agency. It is a place where we are set free to indulge in the
sensuous, powerful act of creation. If the value is in the doing, then using
algorithmic tools to make all the art for you misses the whole point. It
makes as much sense as using a robot to run a marathon for you, or do your
yo-yo tricks for you—or play charades with your friends for you.
THE SPIRIT OF PLAYFULNESS AND THE SPIRIT OF ART ARE DEEPLY aligned. Art,
games, and play are all places where we are de-locked from the demands of

## Página 233

the world—and freed from the demands of the scientific and bureaucratic
ways of dealing with the world. Art, games, play: These are the places
where we’re free to find meaning where we want it—where we get to
practice finding meaning where we want it.
It’s hard to predict what will feel rich and fulfilling and what will feel
empty. I spent years beating myself up over computer games like
Civilization— resource-maximization games in which you endlessly fine-
tune and tweak little systems to be slightly more efficient and wring a tiny
bit more money from your virtual world. You might think the problem is
that those games are repetitive. But one of my favorite video games ever,
Super Hexagon , is hyper-repetitive. You play a simple little ship orbiting the
center of the screen, and the rest of the world is a maze that is endlessly
shrinking toward you. Your only controls are the left and right buttons,
which rotate your ship around the center. And then you have to navigate this
pulsating, spinning maze. And there’s always too much to deal with. The
game keeps accelerating; you can’t keep track of everything with your
conscious mind. So you have to let go—to let your peripheral vision and
your peripheral mind monitor the incoming parts of the maze, and then let
yourself instinctively respond faster than thought. It’s hypnotic, arresting—
and endlessly delicious.
Why does Civilization make me miserable and Super Hexagon make me
happy? I don’t know. I honestly have no fucking idea.
But I don’t owe it to anybody to explain myself. I don’t owe it to
anybody to make my joy clear. I don’t owe it to anybody to coordinate, to
make sense, in the zone of play. I can just accept the unexpected surprise
attack of meaning when it finds me.
When I bind my yo-yo just right, it’ll roll itself up on the string. I can feel
it the whole way. I can actually throw a big curve into the string and the yo-
yo will roll itself up along that arcing pathway. I can feel the gyroscopic
power as it traces the string toward my hand. And the fact that I can control
how the yo-yo rolls itself up—that I can feel the yo-yo following the string
back to my hand—fills me with unutterable joy every time. It is a sensual
and direct experience of angular momentum.
And this may not make sense to you. It may not make sense to most
people. But that doesn’t matter, because it makes sense to me. And when I
am not forced to perpetually justify myself to other people in terms they can
understand—when I am at play—that’s enough.

## Página 234