# 25. The Triumph of Universal Language

## CHAPTER 25

The Triumph of Universal Language
ur social systems seem to reward those who are most willing to
think and speak in terms of mechanically clear values and punish
O those who care about anything else.
Paul Smaldino and Richard McElreath have studied how science
1
evolves in response to social selection pressures. In their paper, “The
Natural Selection of Bad Science,” they use computer models to show how
incentives shape scientists and scientific culture. Here’s one of their models:
First, assume there is some gap between methodologies that lead to good
science and methodologies that get you more publications. Second, assume
that better and more prestigious jobs tend to go to people with more
publications. And third, assume that young scientists-in-training tend to
imitate those scientists with higher-status jobs.
The central assumption of their model—the gap between good science
and publication success—captures a painful open secret of modern
scientific research. Scientists who pick the least rigorous methodology will
tend to publish more papers. Those scientists who go above and beyond—
who use a more painstaking, rigorous methodology—get more accurate
results, but that level of rigor forces them to work more slowly, and publish
fewer papers.
Smaldino and McElreath’s models show that given these assumptions,
scientific institutions will rapidly devolve. In science, publication is the
socially legible signal of success. This incentive system encourages
scientists to maximize their publication rates by selecting the minimally
rigorous method that will pass peer review. Prestige and power will tend to
go to those scientists who are best at gaming the system.
Maybe, you think, we could fix this by ignoring the simplified public
signal and giving the social rewards directly to those who do good science.

## Página 214

But that’s the whole problem: There’s no magic radar that picks up on the
“best science.” Big institutions need to use public signals; they need to use
metrics. And what we’ve learned is that public signals inevitably come
apart from real quality (the Horseman of Scale, raising his head again).
This suggests a general principle: Organized social systems will tend to
give power to those who game the system, rather than those who pursue
what’s really valuable.
What does it mean to “game” a system? It means you exploit the gap
between the signals a system uses to confer rewards and the genuine goods
the system was built to promote. I think we call it “gaming” because we can
see two different versions of the same activity laid on top of each other.
There’s this natural version of the thing, in all its messy value fuzziness.
And then there’s the explicit, mechanized version, expressed in clear rules
and a scoring system—the gamified version of the activity. To game the
system is to ignore the natural version and go all in on the gamified version.
This suggests a general theory of the long-term effects of endemic
systems gaming—a theory of society-wide value collapse . This happens
when:

## 1. a system is built to pursue some rich value.

## 2. the system offers some clear, stable signals for value.

## 3. there is some gap between those signals and what’s actually

valuable.

## 4. some actors optimize for the social signals of value rather than

what’s actually valuable.

## 5. those actors are rewarded by the relevant social systems—with

status, resources, and power.
The result is that over time, the ones who gain power in the system will
be those who are willing to ignore what’s actually valuable and focus on the
social signals of value.
Not all social systems will collapse in this way. This is just a simple
model, built to try to identify the conditions that might lead to social value
collapse. But it will be hard to avoid, because the gap between real value

## Página 215

and the social signals of value is baked into the institutional way of doing
business. This gap arises from the need to decontextualize information,
especially about what’s valuable, to enable fast information exchange at
scale. It is the Four Horsemen at work.
The power of universal communication tools will tend to swamp delicate,
intimate, local speech. This is why people who game the metrics tend to
win power: because metrics are the engineered universal language of value,
which trades away context and sensitivity in exchange for easy
comprehensibility. So those who are willing to use the decontextualized
universal language will tend to win more power, which they can use to
further the reach of the decontextualized universal language.
This is the feedback loop of language and social power.
LANGUAGE, AND OUR CAPACITY TO COMMUNICATE, ARE NOT themselves neutral.
They can be tuned to a purpose—and are so tuned by whoever has the
power to control language. The power to communicate itself can be
unequally distributed. And that power can compound on itself, in a runaway
feedback loop. Remember Hobbes: The ultimate power of the tyrant is the
power to define the meanings of words, like good and success .
The power to communicate is a social resource. It can be distributed
unequally and unjustly. The philosopher Miranda Fricker puts it this way:
When we imagine social injustice, we usually think of the unfair
distribution of concrete resources, like wealth or education or jobs. But
there is another, subtler kind of injustice that arises from the asymmetrical
distribution of the ability to participate in the conversation , the ability to
2
contribute to shared knowledge. She calls this epistemic injustice .
There are two kinds of epistemic injustice. The first is testimonial
injustice . This happens when certain groups of people are automatically
trusted in excess of their competence, and certain other groups of people are
automatically distrusted beneath their competence. Note that we are not
talking about any systematic trust or distrust. We should, in fact, be granting
more trust to people who are actually competent and reliable; we should
trust good-hearted doctors who know the medicine. And we should be
distrusting people who are incompetent or malicious. The problem is we
often end up trusting people based on irrelevant signals. You are probably
all too familiar with the empirical research here: People systematically

## Página 216

3
tend to trust, for no good reason, people from certain genders, races, and
classes over others.
But there is another form of testimonial injustice: We systematically
over-trust quantitative claims and under-trust qualitative claims. This is by
design. Metrics are manufactured for public comprehensibility . They are
engineered to be understood more easily. But this very process usually
makes them less accurate. They are made comprehensible by systematically
cutting off their more nuanced aspects. Ironically, the very process that
gives metrics their social power is also exactly the process by which they
become insensitive. Metrics foster systematic testimonial injustice against
anybody who doesn’t speak in the language of metrics. They siphon
credibility away from anybody still dedicated to subtle values.
There is a second and subtler form of epistemic injustice: what Fricker
calls hermeneutical injustice . Hermeneutical injustice arises from the unfair
distribution of the resources of comprehensibility . It’s what happens when
our language—and our shared store of stories and images and metaphors—
has been tuned to make it easier for some people to express their
experiences, and harder for others.
We don’t always have the right concepts to describe our experience of the
world. We have to invent them. Consider, says Fricker, the term sexual
harassment . Before the 1960s, there was no term that captured the
experience, so common to women, of feeling pressured by people in power
to submit to sexual advances. Back then, the closest available term was
flirting , which means something very different. Flirting associates
unwanted sexual advances with lightness, humor, and mild joyful rule-
breaking. It casts the actions in pleasant, acceptable lighting. It suggests that
these behaviors are acceptable and ordinary, and that the right response to
them is amused acceptance. There was no term that zeroed in on the
unfairness, the awful power dynamics, the inescapable pressure.
The term sexual harassment had to be invented. It came out of groups of
women talking to each other, trying to express this strange, disturbing
experience for which they had no adequate words. Women reported that
before they had the term, they often felt isolated—they felt crazy to be so
upset by a little “flirting.” Their emotions felt unwarranted and silly. But
when groups of women finally coined the term sexual harassment and
started using it, many reported that they suddenly felt sane. They no longer
felt like their emotional reactions—fear, nausea, intense anxiety—were

## Página 217

abnormal or irrational. Their experience became more comprehensible to
themselves, and more expressible to others. It became a shared experience
4
—a real experience. And women who had been harassed could now make
themselves and their emotional state more easily understood—their anger,
their discomfort, their need to leave whole career paths behind.
And the reason why for so long we had flirting but not sexual harassment
should be obvious: For a long time, men had more social power, and made
language that suited their purposes . Inequities in the social landscape get
written into our resources for communication, which feedback to support
that social inequity.
Resistance to this, when it happens, will start in the odd corners—in
unofficial speech, in slang, rap, poetry, in the newly invented language of
small, sidelined communities. Or, as poet-activist Audre Lorde puts it, in
“Poetry Is Not a Luxury”:
5
For women, then, poetry is not a luxury. It is a vital necessity of
our existence. It forms the quality of the light within which we
predicate our hopes and dreams toward survival and change, first
made into language, then into idea, then into more tangible action.
Poetry is the way we help give name to the nameless so it can be
thought.
Language isn’t just this natural thing that fell from the sky, finished and
perfect. We are constantly modifying it—adding to it and reshaping it to suit
our purposes. We come up with new language, new metaphors, and new
stories to describe our experiences—to make our lives make sense to us and
to others.
A close friend of mine is autistic. She says that earlier in her life, it was
much harder for her to explain why she had trouble eating enough food—a
common problem, she says, among autistic people. But the term anorexia
was part of the standard cultural language, and so it often got applied to her
—but it felt wrong. She felt swept up into an alien network of associations
and diagnoses: that her problems were of body image, of media intrusion,
of body dysmorphia. That accurately described other people’s very real
problems, but it didn’t describe hers. And the ready availability of that
language tended to make other people try to help her in the wrong way.

## Página 218

Things got much better, she said, when improved language for the
autistic experience made its way into common currency. When people
started becoming familiar with the concept of sensory issues associated
with autism, it became easier for her to describe her experience—to be
understood and to get the appropriate kind of help. And it helped her
understand her own experience—to recognize in the moment what was
going on with her. It helped her zero in on the real problem of being
overwhelmed by textures, especially when she was subject to other kinds of
sensory overstimulation. When she had trouble eating, what she needed
wasn’t counseling about accepting her body. She needed access to lower-
stimulus environments, and more texturally simple foods. And that was
very hard to understand about herself—and communicate—without the
right language.
Steven Kapp and Ari Ne’eman tell a similar story about medical language
that surrounds autism. They are part of the Autistic Self Advocacy Network
—the leading advocacy group for and run by autistic people. Kapp and
Ne’eman documented their attempts to intervene in the definition of
“autism” as it was being developed for the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-V ). The DSM-V shapes who gets
classified as autistic, helps determine who gets insurance, and guides the
focus of medical treatment. But, they said, no autistic person had ever been
6

## part of the committee that set the definition. The interests of autistic

people weren’t adequately represented in the authoritative medical language
that ruled their lives.
Kapp and Ne’eman were particularly concerned with the fact that the
proposed entry for autism included diagnostic criteria about the presence of
“fixated interests” and “repetitive motor movements.” Those are
medicalizing terms, which present these behaviors as problems to be fixed
through medical intervention. Most autistic people vastly prefer the terms
special interests and stimming , which legitimize those behaviors. For many
autistic people, say Kapp and Ne’eman, special interests are a source of
meaning and richness in life, and stimming is a source of daily satisfaction
and pleasure. (As my autistic friend puts it: “My intense hobbies are the
best part of my life. Why the hell should I try to get rid of them?”)
According to Kapp and Ne’eman, the proposed definition of autism, and the
language it used, represented the interests of non-autistic people—in
forcing autistic people to conform to standard norms of social behavior and

## Página 219

behave in a way that makes non-autistic people feel more comfortable. That
language did not represent the experiences of autistic people, or their
interests in their own happiness and well-being.
Language is a kind of technology. It is the product of social action, and it
supports some interests over others. The concepts we have can enable one
pattern of thinking and association and suppress others. So the unequal
distribution of social power elsewhere in the world becomes reflected in our
language. Those in power have more ability to invent language to suit their
purposes, and spread that language. Those with less power, even when they
manage to invent the language to describe their experiences, will have less
ability to spread it into the common lexicon. That’s hermeneutical injustice:
a subtle, but deep and pervasive, kind of social injustice, in which the social
resources of comprehensibility are unevenly distributed .
Metrics create hermeneutical injustice.
The world is full of semiprivate, intimate languages. There is the special
way we speak to our friends, the in-jokes and the references to shared
moments. There are the special languages and expressions in our weird little
communities—in the punk scene we grew up in, in the world of tabletop
role-playing, in the world of rock climbing, in our geeky online gardening
group. There are particular languages that develop in addiction support
groups, in trauma survivor groups.
But a lot of these terms don’t have widespread social uptake, because
their comprehensibility is limited to those small worlds. To understand each
of these terms, you need to spend a lot of time in that community. But
metrics are the ultimate easy-to-understand, cross-contextual, easily
digested language. So there is a greater social power available to those who
are willing to speak in terms of metrics and to organize their lives to
succeed in those terms, because what they do, and why they do it, will be
understood widely and instantly.
Metrics aren’t just any old language. They’re a language of justification .
They tell us not just neutral data but whether something has succeeded or
failed . When we point out that a particular attendance policy leads to
greater student graduation rates, or that one nonprofit successfully delivered
more mosquito nets per donated dollar than another, we are doing more than
merely reporting some stale facts. We are making value judgments. We are
saying who did the right thing and who failed and needs to change.
Convincing people requires, in part, that they understand your reasons and

## Página 220

consider them significant. Metrics are an engineered language of fast
universal justifications . They help us coordinate our actions because they
coordinate what we recognize as success.
So there is a greater social power available to those who are willing to
speak strictly in terms of metrics, to confine their justifications and claims
to those terms that have been manufactured to be comprehensible across all
contexts. They will be more broadly understood. And this creates a form of
hermeneutical injustice—because once metrics have gotten general uptake,
all those other more private, strange, and intimate forms of understanding
are now second-class citizens in the world of justification. Speaking in the
meaningful, rich, and nuanced language of a particular community puts you
in a weaker position. You are harder to understand; it is harder to rally
people to your side.
Just like money, the social resource of comprehensibility can build on
itself, accumulate, and grow. Language is also subject to the brutal logic of
compound interest.
Imagine there are two people. Let’s call them the Compromiser and the
Captured. The Compromiser has their own subtle values but knows they
have to speak in this ultra-public simplified language of metrics to get
anything done. They are using metrics in public to be understood, but they
keep their real values separate.
The Captured has no such firewall. They have eliminated any private
reasoning and think to themselves only in the ultra-public language of
justifications. They only care about success in those public terms. They are
fully value-captured; it’s metrics all the way down.
The Captured will probably be more efficient at succeeding in terms of
the metrics. After all, there is no drag in the system, nothing that distracts
them from all-out optimization. It is easy to hit one clear target when it’s all
you are about. It’s much harder to hit a target when you’re also trying to
balance it against a whole host of other cares.
If that assumption is true—that the Captured will tend to succeed over
the Compromiser in terms of the metrics—then we will get the following
horrifying result: There will be systematically greater social power
available to those who are willing to forget about everything that isn’t
measured in metrics and will instead optimize themselves entirely to fit
what the metrics ask for. They won’t be wasting energy on distractions like
beauty or community, the joys of pure, playful process—or anything else.

## Página 221

They will have transformed their deepest values to fit the most public idea
of success.
If this is right, then we will have a truly perilous feedback loop: a long-
term, all-encompassing social value collapse. The people who were willing
to target success entirely in those simplified, metrified terms will start to
outcompete those who were not. They will start to accumulate more social
power and more resources. And they will be able to amplify their social
power by spending those resources to gain further control of the language—
and tying even more social power to success in those narrowed terms.

## Página 222