# Material inicial

# The Score (C. Thi Nguyen)

[Fuente: The Score (C. Thi Nguyen).pdf | Formato: PDF]

## Página 3

About the Author

## C. Thi Nguyen is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of

Utah, and a specialist in the philosophy of games, the philosophy of
technology, and the theory of value. A former food writer for the Los
Angeles Times , Nguyen is active in public philosophy, writing for the New
York Times, Washington Post, New Statesman , and elsewhere.

## Página 4

## C. Thi Nguyen

## T H E S C O R E

How to Stop Playing Someone Else’s Game

## Página 5

Contents

## PART 1

## OPENING MOVES

## 1. Is This the Game You Really Want to Be Playing?

## 2. Striving Play

## 3. Value Capture

## 4. Scoring Systems Create Convergence

## PART 2

## WHAT SCORES DO

## 5. The Art of Agency

## 6. Transparency Is Surveillance

## 7. The Beauty of the Process

## 8. The Limits of Data

## 9. The Score Shapes the Struggle

## PART 3

## WHY USE MECHANICAL SCORING?

## 10. Scoring Systems Change the Subject

## 11. Mechanical Values

## 12. Flexibility Through Restriction

## 13. The Secret Heart of Mechanization

## 14. Choice of Difficulty

## 15. Reflective Control

## PART 4

## STANDARDIZED VALUES

## 16. Values Hidden in the Machine

## Página 6

## 17. Whose Interest Does Standardization Serve?

## 18. Who Cuts Up the World?

## 19. Islands of Meaning

## 20. Centralizing Values

## 21. Technologies of Work, Technologies of Play

## PART 5

## WHAT DO WE DO?

## 22. There Is Too Much World

## 23. Objectivity Laundering

## 24. The Seductions of Clarity

## 25. The Triumph of Universal Language

## 26. Play for Its Own Sake

## 27. Art Is a Game

## 28. Infrastructures of Play

## 29. Some Endings

Acknowledgments
Notes
Index

## Página 7

For Mel

## Página 8

## Part 1

## O P E N I N G M O V E S

## Página 9