# 17. Whose Interest Does Standardization Serve?

## CHAPTER 17

Whose Interest Does Standardization Serve?
ut why do we let standardization into our lives in the first place?
Why not resist standardized metrics and try to shift the world over
B to decentralized scoring systems? Why not make the world more
like a game—or more like an ecosystem of millions of different games? But
the cost for such decentralization is high. We have accepted standardization
because it is so powerful, because it grants us greater levels of efficiency,
and greater volumes of output, than we have ever seen before. But
standardization also enforces a particular set of values on us. It plugs us into
a whole way of life—the way of the factory.
Let’s start by looking at how standardization works apart from metrics.
Standardization is the process whereby we take a part of the world that is
naturally variable and make it regular across time and space—across
different people and different cultures. Standardization of anything, even
the most mundane measurement tools, is a deeply value-laden act; it is an
enormous transformation of the world, which serves some interests above
others.
For people who grew up in the modern, industrialized world, it’s hard to
imagine life before standardization. We just casually assume that everybody
else in the world has access to a ruler that measures the same inches and
centimeters, and a set of measuring implements that measure the same cups
and tablespoons.
But things were not always that way. Imagine, for the moment, that you
live somewhere in the time before industrialization. You make bread at
home for your family. You notice that some days the bread comes out better
than others, so you start measuring to keep track of what you’re doing
differently. You’ll probably start measuring in the most natural way—say,
with handfuls of flour, or with a particular mug that you happen to have

## Página 159

hanging nearby. If you want to teach your child to bake, you might figure
out how many of your handfuls is equivalent to their handful, or point them
to that specific mug.
In this small-scale world, there’s no need for the thing known as the
standard cup measure, which is held stable across nations and continents.
Left to their own devices, people will make all different sizes of cups. To
create an international standard cup measure, we need to make sure that
thousands of factories around the world are producing measuring cups of
precisely the same size. That effort is worthwhile for a specific purpose:
instantly communicating recipes to distant strangers. It enables us to write
cookbooks and have anybody else easily re-create the measurements. And it
enables us to have fast-food chain restaurants, so that we that can get all
kinds of different people in different places to make hamburgers that taste
exactly the same.
But standardization is not a pure improvement. It is a deep change to the
way the world works that helps some parts of human life and hinders
others. Theodore Porter provides a mind-bending example about the coming
of standardized time. We modern people are now on clock time . I live in
Salt Lake City, Utah. The time on my watch is exactly the same as the time
of somebody five hundred miles to the east, in Denver, Colorado. And the
time on my watch can easily be translated into the time for somebody in
New York or London—we have a method for adjusting the hours but
leaving the minutes and seconds precisely synchronized around the world.
Our time is standardized on a global scale, through a vast social effort of
establishing time zones and Greenwich Mean Time.
But things were not always so. In an earlier era, most people used what is
called diurnal time. In one system of diurnal time, six a.m. is pegged to
sunrise, and six p.m. is pegged to sunset. When people hear about diurnal
time, they often react with complete disgust. It seems, at first glance, like
complete chaos. First of all, the hours would expand and contract. A
daylight hour would be much longer in the summer than in the winter. And
there would be no easy coordination between different cities. Wendover is
only a couple hours’ drive west of Salt Lake City, but the sunrise there is
already nine minutes later.
But it doesn’t take long to see the advantages. First, if you work on a
farm, it could make perfect sense for the hours to be longer in the summer
and shorter in the winter. There’s more to do in the summer, and it’s fine to

## Página 160

sleep more in the winter. When our work is keyed to diurnal time, that
happens naturally. And diurnal time is intrinsically keyed to the light. If you
had a standing agreement to start work at seven a.m., under diurnal time
your work always starts at the same stage of the day cycle. You would
always be starting work in daylight.
Clock time is completely different. I take my kids to school at eight a.m.
Under clock time, that means sometimes I’m waking up and getting them
out the door in full sunlight, but sometimes that means I’m waking up in
total darkness, dragging my recalcitrant body out of bed to rouse my kids.
It’s not impossible to coordinate clock time with the sun. If we were in
clock time and wanted school to start an hour after the sun rises, we could
figure out exactly when that was each day and constantly change the start
time for school. But that would take an enormous effort. It runs against
what clock time is built to do. Clock time is designed to make some
interactions effortless (international Zoom meeting at nine a.m. East Coast
time), at the cost of making other interactions very hard (meet an hour past
sunrise every day).
Diurnal time and standardized clock time serve deeply different purposes
and ways of life. This is why the choice of timing systems is value-laden.
Diurnal time is keyed to the natural world; it serves the human animal,
which likes to wake with the light and sleep with the dark. It serves the
person who needs light to work. But it completely fails at coordinating
trains, planes, and Zoom meetings. This is why we see the rise of
standardized time around the need for precisely coordinating between
faraway cities—when we need to arrange exact train schedules, or to all be
on the same call at the same time from different cities. Standardized time
breaks the relationship to a specific place and season, to the changing light.
It detaches us from the sun and our sun-attuned animal nature. In return, it
1
gives us the ability to easily coordinate between faraway places.
I suspect many of our interests fit nicely with standardized clock time—
though not all. The part of me that hates standardized time is the part that
has to get up an hour before sunrise to start getting my kids ready for
school. The point here isn’t that diurnal time is objectively better and
standardized clock time objectively terrible. The point is that each system
serves a different set of interests—each supports some kinds of life and
undercuts others. And when we standardize a system, we make one rigid
solution designed for one set of interests and then spread it across the

## Página 161

world. Instead of having multiple flexible systems tuned to serve many
different interests, we have a single system tuned to serve a single monolith
of interests.
Sometimes that might work great for you, when your interests align with
the monolith. But it’s unlikely to work for everybody, precisely because
people’s interests vary. Standardized systems work by being rigid across
vast scales. This enables frictionless coordination, but with a trade-off:
Standardized systems strongly discourage sensitive adaptation to the
particular local environment.
SOME OF OUR MOST POWERFUL TECHNOLOGIES ARE TOOLS FOR attention . They
tell us what to notice, and what to ignore. And when we standardize these
tools, we standardize our attention.
Consider maps. Maps are one of these attentional technologies. Jorge
Luis Borges, the fantastical Argentinean writer, has a one-paragraph short
story about maps called “On Exactitude in Science.” In it, he imagines a
culture in which the mapmakers are so exacting, so demanding, they require
that absolutely no detail be left out of a map. Their map of the world will
then turn out to be the exact size of the world. But this perfectly complete
map is also perfectly useless. It doesn’t do the job of a map. Maps work by
highlighting certain details, which they do by deleting other details.
Maps work by leaving out what’s irrelevant. Or to be more precise : Maps
work by throwing out whatever the person in control of the map thinks is
irrelevant .
2
Denis Wood, in The Power of Maps , says that every map represents a
set of choices about what to record and what to conceal. Those choices
come out of the interests of the mapmaker and are then embedded into the
map. When ordinary people use the map, those interests leak out into the
users—quietly, based on what the map shows them and what it doesn’t.
Take a look at a standard map that you might find in an atlas, or one of
the standard settings on Google Maps. What you’re likely to see are roads
and road names; the boundaries between states and countries; major nature
features like mountains, rivers, and lakes; and elevation lines for topology.
The map clearly highlights a particular set of information. For many of us,
as we’re driving from spot to spot, it gives exactly the information we need.

## Página 162

But there is so much information that is not usually mapped, though it
easily could be. For example, asks Wood, why don’t we usually map sound
quality? It would take some effort to measure the average decibel level at
various points in a city, but it also takes effort to survey precise elevation
and the exact curvature of every road. Yet we rarely find such maps. The
reason, says Wood, is that most mapmakers—and the institutions behind
them—don’t care about sound quality.
Every map serves someone’s purpose. The standard road map serves the
interests of travelers, especially drivers, to get to where they’re going. The
standard property map serves the interests of those who trade in land or tax
its owners. A map that conveys information about sound quality, or public
access to natural beauty, would serve the people who wanted to have a
pleasant life in a city. Each map serves an interest, which is revealed in
what the map chooses to call our attention to and what it chooses to ignore.
Standard maps don’t record where the interesting graffiti and street art
are, or where people tend to hang out on the street at night, but for people
like me, that’s incredibly important. Almost every map, on the other hand,
contains elevation details. It turns out this is because most of our modern
maps are built on top of an original set of maps that were created by army
engineers to show the elevation and road details in their own countries,
3
giving them a tactical advantage against invaders. They were made as aids
for precise artillery targeting.
Maps may look like merely neutral reportage of neutral facts, but they are
not. They are profoundly value-laden. They are social actions, full of
meaningful choices. They express a particular perspective about what’s
valuable and what’s not. And the choices inherent in maps end up having a
profound effect on everybody who uses them.
Standardization doesn’t come from nowhere, and maps don’t spring
magically into being. In our world, some authority decides what is the
standard map. Maps are a technology that centralizes decisions about what
we should notice.

## Página 163