# 3. Value Capture

## CHAPTER 3

Value Capture
spent the beginning of my life completely in my head. I was always
playing computer games or curled around a book. By the time I was
I twenty-two, my back hurt and my knees creaked when I walked. My
doc looked at me one day, shook her head, and said, “Look, buddy,
honestly, if you don’t start doing something about it, your joints are only
going to get worse.”
So I flailed around trying to find some kind of exercise routine that I
didn’t totally hate. I started running on the treadmill; I went for hikes; I did
some yoga. I started trying to eat less crap, too, cutting down on sodas and
doughnuts and the huge bags of chips I used to binge on. For a while, it
worked wonders. My back stopped hurting. I started feeling good, feeling
healthy. I started paying attention to how my body and mind responded to
food. I noticed how a massive meal of cheesy pasta made me weirdly
sleepy and aimless, but a diet with plenty of protein and vegetables and
rich, fatty stews made me feel amazing. I started going to the farmers
market. I fell in love with fresh asparagus—with getting that perfect sear on
them, so they ended up balanced just right between crisp and melting-soft,
with that concentrated vegetal sweetness.
And then I started getting obsessed with some very specific numbers. I
had dropped a few pounds naturally and easily with the diet shift, but that
stalled out after a year. But I wanted more. I wanted to see the number on
the scale keep ticking down. It felt like progress. So I started measuring my
caloric intake. I bought an app that tracked my weight. Every morning I’d
wake up and look at the line graph of my weight loss. The angle of that line
mattered so much to me. Tracking my weight made me drop a bit more, but
that stalled out after a while, too. That was no good; I was addicted to the
feeling of progress. So I bought another app that tracked my macronutrients

## Página 38

and started entering into it every single thing I ate—how many calories,
how much protein. I started cutting out things I deeply loved, because they
didn’t have the optimum balance of macronutrients.
But figuring out the exact nutrient balance in each meal took a lot of
work. To make things easier, I developed some standard meals. I knew their
nutrition data better, which made it easier to enter my daily stats into the
app. This made my eating life more boring, but the stats were more
consistent and easier to log. That meant I could keep losing weight.
At some point, I stopped making those lovely stews. They had a ton of
ingredients—lots of different meats and beans and vegetables. But because
they were so complicated, the nutritional data was much harder to enter into
the app. So I started eating more prepackaged meals—frozen meals and
boxed pasta—because it was easier to enter the nutrient content right off the
package. My body felt kind of hollow. I was spending more time on the
treadmill, trying to burn more calories each day. My joints started hurting
again.
Something had happened. I had gone into this whole thing for health, to
make my joints hurt less, to make my body feel better. But then something
shifted in me, and I stopped caring about how my back and joints felt. I
started caring about a number on a scale—my weight—and continuing to
make it go down. My original goals had changed. I was focused on
achievement based on an external measure—and the form of the new goals
was set, in part, by the demand for external clarity.
Here we run headlong into the Gap again—the distance between what’s
easy to measure and what matters. But there should have also been an easy
solution to the Gap. I should have been able to think to myself: “I started
this whole dieting thing to feel healthier. I adopted this simplified scoring
system of dropping weight in order to feel healthier. But if those simple
scoring systems aren’t helping, I should just stop using them. They aren’t
getting me what I actually care about.” Once I became aware that I had
fallen into the Gap, I should have been able to course-correct and adjust my
scoring system to achieve what was really important. But I didn’t. I had
slowly forgotten what I had originally cared about. I was letting the sharp,
clear metric dominate my inner vision. I had been value captured. I wasn’t
using a scoring system to achieve my own values; I was letting the scoring
system set my values for me.

## Página 39

In value capture, you adopt some simplified value as given and use it as
is. If you start the road to exercise with a Fitbit and eventually start
modulating the goals, hacking them to suit you, then that’s not value
capture. Value capture is when you ingest it wholesale.
Value capture doesn’t only occur around metrics. You can be value-
captured by a slogan or a simplified belief system. But some of the most
obvious, most common, and most powerful versions of value capture
happen when we are exposed to a simple public scoring system—a ranking,
a metric, a numerical score—and it takes over our decision-making. Those
simple quantifications invite value capture. They cut through the noise; they
make decisions so much easier. Scoring systems are a particularly seductive
format for simplified values.
And value capture isn’t just for individuals. Groups can be value-
captured by metrics and measures that come from external sources. A
newspaper can be value-captured by clicks and page views; a whole police
precinct can be value-captured by the case-closure rate. In fact, large-scale
institutions will turn out to be among the most vulnerable to value capture,
because metrics speak directly in the language of bureaucracy.
I named value capture after regulatory capture —a problem in which
government regulators go astray. These regulators are supposed to serve the
public interest. Regulatory capture occurs when they end up, instead,
serving the interests of the very companies they’re supposed to be
regulating. For example, the Food and Drug Administration is supposed to
regulate the pharmaceutical industry. But sometimes some government
regulators become friends with folks in the pharmaceutical industry—and
the cushiest job for retired government regulators is often on the other side.
So they start identifying with the pharmaceutical companies and caring
1
about those corporations’ interests. Those regulators have been captured
by the industries they were supposed to regulate.
So, too, with value capture: Your values might get captured by some
external metric, so that they no longer serve your own interests, but the
interests of some external institution or process.
Value capture is real. Empirical researchers—sociologists,
2
anthropologists, and historians —have provided exhaustive
documentation. Rankings tend to seize an outsize chunk of institutional and
personal attention, even when they’re clearly oversimplified.

## Página 40

But is value capture always harmful? Maybe you think I’ve cherry-
picked particularly rotten metrics. Obviously we lose out when a
corporation changes from caring about making beautiful and meaningful
movies to caring about profits. It’s a shift from beneficent motives toward
selfish ones. But can’t we find better metrics? It wouldn’t be so wrong to
adopt, as your own personal values, a well-designed, good-hearted metric.
After all, these are measurements created by experts. Maybe the doctors
understand health better than ordinary folks; maybe the psychologists
understand happiness better. Perhaps we should just trust the experts.
A lot of us instinctively believe this won’t work—that when it comes to
measuring things like happiness, education, beauty, and well-being, even
the best-designed metric will miss the mark. But why?
3
Let’s start with a real-world case. One of the richest empirical studies of
value capture is Engines of Anxiety , by sociologists Wendy Nelson Espeland
and Michael Sauder. The authors studied the impact of the U.S. News &
World Report law school rankings.
Before U.S. News , there was no ranking of American law schools. There
was only Barron’s , a guide to law schools that gave qualitative descriptions
of each. Barron’s had a blurb about each university’s unique mission and
potential—and different schools often had very different missions. Some
were there to get their students into corporate law jobs, while others cared a
ton about legal theory and research. Some were oriented toward helping
train activists who’d fight for social justice; others aimed to help students in
traditionally underserved populations.
The problem was that these blurbs were clearly PR written by the
universities—and therefore untrustworthy. To get the real scoop, you had to
know the right people. But if you weren’t part of the in-crowd—if you
were, say, like me, a first-generation immigrants’ kid with zero connections
in the world of fancy American education—you had no reliable source for
that information. So, to help people like me, U.S. News & World Report
started ranking universities, to take that insider knowledge and make it
public. And it partly succeeded at that task: Its ranking system makes law
school stats fully accessible.
But that publicity has a cost. In condensing all the complex information
into a single ranking system, U.S. News changed how people thought about
and valued law schools. The rankings heavily weight a small handful of
4
stats, including the incoming class’s average GPA and LSAT scores, and

## Página 41

they measure the employment rate of students at the nine-month
postgraduation mark.
Obviously, these are thin measures that leave out important information.
But law schools have come to devote themselves to moving up in those
rankings, which means they have put those thin measures at their very core.
Huge shares of university resources have been diverted away from genuine
pedagogical activity and toward efforts designed only to game the rankings.
For example, the rankings care about the school’s rejection rate for
applicants, because a higher rejection rate is presumably an indicator of
elite status. So many law schools have started spending a lot of resources on
encouraging unlikely applicants to apply, simply so they’ll have more
people to reject.
Espeland and Sauder point to another, subtler effect. Law schools used to
have genuinely different missions, but the rankings have mostly gotten rid
of that value plurality. They impose a single, monolithic value system over
the whole culture. A law school that, say, cared about serving a historically
underrepresented community faced a bind. Students from such communities
typically had lower GPA and LSAT scores, which meant that continuing to
aim for an outreach mission would plunge a law school down the rankings.
And the rankings are so powerful—they influence so much funding and
student choice—that most law schools have been forced to give up on their
original missions and devote themselves to the rankings.
But we do not yet have a clear case of value capture. These effects might
simply be the result of bad incentives. An incentive is just an offer of some
desirable resource—like money or attention—that can be used to get what
you really want. Incentives can provide some motivation, but they don’t
change your core values. They just change which crap you have to slog
through to get the resources that let you do what you really want. But you
still have a choice. Let’s say you really value your family. Your job
incentivizes you to work more hours with bonus pay. Sometimes you’ll
choose to work those extra hours to get money to support your family. But
you can also choose sometimes to ignore those incentives and take more
time at home with your family.
Value capture is the next step. It happens when you internalize a metric—
when you let it set your core values. And if you do that, you’ll stop making
trade-offs between the metric and what you really value—because the
metric will have redefined your core sense of what’s important.

## Página 42

Espeland and Sauder give us a perfect example of value capture. They
studied archived online conversations between prospective law students
discussing which law school to go to. And the rankings, the authors say,
completely changed how law students thought and what they valued.
Espeland and Sauder report that before the rankings, the decision about
which law school to go to often triggered some real soul-searching.
Students had to decide between institutions that embodied deeply different
values. This pushed them to ask big questions about their own values—
about what they wanted out of their own legal education and future career.
Did they care about money? A shot at a prestigious clerkship with the
Supreme Court? Or did they care more about become an activist, using their
legal skills to help defend the downtrodden? The choice of law schools was
a value crossroads, which triggered a process of deep deliberation—about
what kind of life looked meaningful to them.
U.S. News & World Report changed all that. The moment those rankings
came out, students stopped trying to figure out what mattered to them
personally. The rankings offered what looked like a single, objective answer
to what counts as “best.” Most students just took it on board, and assumed
that their goal was to get into the highest-ranked law school they could. The
rankings suppressed the richness of various values and offered, instead, a
singular, monolithic value system. Instead of going through the difficult
process of developing their own values for themselves, the students now
had an easier route: they could adopt a prefabricated value system.
In value capture, you’re outsourcing your values. You’re letting an
external metric or ranking set what’s important for you. You’re outsourcing
the process of figuring out your own sense of meaning.
But is outsourcing your values bad? We outsource bits of our mind all the
time. I outsource my memory to my Google Docs file and my phone’s
calendar app. I outsource my purchasing decisions about appliances to
5
online reviewers. I even outsource my attention and exploration to
Google, which searches the world for me and tells me what to look at first.
But it matters what I’m outsourcing—whether I’m outsourcing something
minor, or a central pillar of my identity. It seems particularly dangerous to
outsource the big, life-driving decisions about our education, our hobbies,
our career, our health. Value capture seems most threatening when it
intrudes into our core values. And notice: Whatever’s wrong with value
capture, it can’t just be a problem with consent. Often, we knowingly and

## Página 43

willingly submit to value capture. We decide to wear that Fitbit precisely
because it will amp up our motivation and drive our decisions. We decide to
stay on social media, knowing it’s capturing our attention and values.
This is why the “outsourcing” metaphor seems so right to me. The
problem with outsourcing is not that it’s involuntary. We can choose to
outsource. And sometimes outsourcing makes good sense. It’s quick and
efficient. It lets us engage the power of external specialists and the
efficiencies of scale. The whole point of looking at other people’s reviews
of, say, emergency flashlights is that the issue is complicated and technical
and I really don’t care all that much. So I can let some hardcore tech geek
who actually loves flashlights do all the research for me and tell me what’s
best.
The problem with outsourcing is also not just that your values are coming
from the outside. We learn most of our values from external sources: our
upbringing, our culture, art, and religion. But when you pick up your values
from your family or your community, you’re free to modify them and adjust
them on the fly as you live your life. You can start with an external value
and then tailor it to fit. But something very different happens when you’re
value-captured by an institutional metric: You’re binding yourself to an
inflexible external standard.
And there are whole realms of human life that institutional metrics
cannot penetrate. Metrics are formulated to meet the demands of large-scale
institutions: They are made to be usable by anybody, comprehensible by
anybody, and consistently applicable by anybody. There are limitations on
every institutional metric, bound up with their basic function. They tend to
track what’s easy to measure— simple externalities and obvious outcomes.
And they tend to be rigid . The very nature of institutional metrics resists
adjustment and tailoring. Institutional metrics are made to fit the needs of
fast and efficient organization at scale, and not to fit your particular
individual needs or the needs of your small-scale community.
Much of our sense of meaning and worth is peculiar, personal, and local.
And metrics will always be deeply insensitive to such intimate, small-scale
senses of meaning. Metrics are tuned to the needs of massive institutions.
They are blunt and insensitive tools for sensing the meaningfulness of life.
This is what we’ll spend much of the rest of this book exploring: how
metrics aim at large-scale comprehensibility—and how the price for that is

## Página 44

intimacy, sensitivity, and context. Outsourcing always involves a trade-off.
What we gain in efficiency, we lose in personalization.
With value capture, you’re buying your values off the rack. They won’t
be tailored to you; they won’t be made for your specific life and personality.
Let me be clear: I’m not saying that metrics are useless, or that they’re
always made for malicious purposes. Many metrics are created by good
people, for perfectly sensible reasons. Metrics can make our progress
clearer and more transparent; they can introduce accountability into
formerly opaque systems. They can make us more objective and help us get
rid of biases. Their simple clarity can help push us toward the big but easy-
to-measure social goods: reducing poverty, decreasing CO emissions,
2
increasing vaccination rates. The weakness of metrics lies in pursuing
subtler goods. The clarity that helps them do their job—coordinating very
different people—is precisely what makes them insensitive to more delicate
forms of meaning.
But this leads us back to our big question: What makes metrics and
games hit so differently? Because playing games—and fluidly picking up
new desires from the victory conditions—looks an awful lot like
outsourcing. And if what we really want is well-fitting metrics, maybe we
can just turn institutional metrics into a kind of game. Why not tweak them
until they fit and give us the life we want?
I want to say: It’s not that easy.
I’m not saying that games are always good and metrics are always bad.
You can be value-captured by a game. Plenty of high school athletes get
value-captured by the sports they play. I spent years obsessed with grinding
my way up for more poker wins, until I realized the whole thing just made
me miserable. And it’s possible to be playful with institutional metrics, to
find the ones that make your life fun. But it’s unlikely. The basic nature of
games encourages—but does not mandate—playful freedom. And the
nature of bureaucracies and institutions resists—but does not make
impossible—that kind of playful control.
To understand why, we need to look much more carefully at what scoring
systems are, and what they do for us—and to us. Scoring systems lie at the
heart of many games and bureaucracies. All these scoring systems perform
a very similar task. They offer points, which get turned into a ranking. They
say who did better and who did worse. But they can have profoundly
different effects: deep and joyful play in some circumstances, and misery in

## Página 45

others. To see why, we need to understand the basic function of scoring
systems, and how that function gets put to different uses in different
contexts.

## Página 46