# 18. Who Cuts Up the World?

## CHAPTER 18

Who Cuts Up the World?
etrics are a technology that standardizes attention. A metric
focuses us on pursuing whatever it is the metric is tracking. And
M somebody decided what to track.
Sometimes, that decision is incredibly obvious. When a university
administration creates student success metrics and decides to gather data on
student graduation rates and employment rates—but not student happiness
or the growth of friendships between students—that is a value decision
about what counts as success. Here, it is obvious a particular set of values
has been baked into the data set.
But often those decisions are subtler. The interests and values in metrics
can hide far beneath the surface. To track them, we have to look at another
technology—an incredibly pervasive and powerful one. It shapes what we
notice, think about, and care about. It is a technology that lies underneath
every metric, and every data-collection effort, that colors every data-based
decision. It is one of key places where particular values and political
interests leak into data and metrics. It is so foundational that it is almost
invisible.
We are about to dive into the true beating heart of the standardized
modern world and see how deeply external systems can rewrite the basic
structure of our world. But when I tell you where we’re going, it will
probably seem like the most boring thing in the world. So much of the time,
the most important decisions hide under a cloak of dullness—in how,
exactly, subprime mortgage-backed securities work, or how we regulate the
funding for drug trials. I am terrified that in about two seconds, you’re
going to put down this book in disgust. But I have become convinced, after
beating my head against understanding metrics for years of my life, that this
is where the action really is.

## Página 164

We need to talk about classification manuals.
Classification systems are how we standardize our categories. They are
how we set, officially, how we will all cut up the world. I cannot overstate
how important classification manuals are to this whole story. Classification
systems are the engine under the hood of metrics and data. They are the
conceptual foundation; they set the basic blocks in which institutions will
think —and how people inside those institutions will talk, remember, and
justify themselves.
Why? In order to have a metric, we need to collect data. And to collect
data about something, we need a standardized category for it. Without that
standardized category, we can’t coordinate our efforts enough to collect any
meaningful data. So we use things like the DSM ( Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders ), which coordinates how psychiatrists,
researchers, and insurance companies categorize mental disorders. Having
the stable, shared categories of the DSM enables us to consistently collect
data about mental disorders, to perform research on that data, and then to
make decisions about whether, say, you can be diagnosed with chronic
depression and get insurance coverage for your treatment.
Classification systems determine which data we can collect. If there’s no
category for it, we won’t get data on it. And if we don’t have data for it, we
can’t target it with a metric. But classification systems aren’t just a neutral
reporting of the real world. They are, once again, a designed filtration
system that translates the real world into something that fits into a database.
And in doing so, they standardize what we notice and what we ignore—
what we remember, and what we forget.
Classification systems are tools to standardize meanings. And they don’t
fall magically from the sky; they are not borne of some institutional version
of immaculate conception. Somebody made them, somebody decided what
they would focus on. Somebody drew the lines. They are deeply value-
laden technologies. The key questions are: Who built these classification
systems and decided which meanings to standardize? Whose interests do
these classification systems serve?
Classification systems determine how we count together. Because
counting, too, is a value-laden act.
Counting might seem as easy as 1-2-3, but it’s only that easy once we
know what the objects are . In other words, counting is easy if you’ve
already settled how you’re going to sort the world into categories . But by

## Página 165

the time you’ve gotten to the 1-2-3 part, the real action is already over.
Because in order to count things, we first need to decide how we’re going to
cut up the world into the things that we’re going to count. Much of the time,
we have choices about where to draw the lines.
Suppose I hand you a big pile of stuff and tell you to count the lemons
and limes. This might seem easy at first. Here are some perfect lemons and
some perfect limes. But now you get to the tougher cases. I just found two
halves of a lime in different parts of the pile. Do I count that as one whole
lime, or two? Here’s a lime that’s about one-third rotten. Does that count as
a lime, or two-thirds of a lime? What about this thing, which might be a
lime, but is mostly just some moldy peel? Does it count—and if so, do I
count it as a whole lime or a partial lime? And oh, here are these hybrid
fruits from a tree that got cross-pollinated. Do I count them as lemons or as
limes? Do I count them as both? Or do I create some other category, maybe
called “hybrids” or “other,” and count them separately?
When I’m counting, I need to be able to identify what counts and what
doesn’t in each category. I need some kind of identification criteria. And
even if you just tell me to “count the apples in the orchard,” I still need to
identify apples from non-apples. I’m still sorting the world into two piles:
apples and everything else. I need to know where the edges are.
If we’re going to count together, we need to share these edges. And to do
that, we need to make sure that different people are counting in the same
way . Which means we need to make sure people are cutting up the world in
the same way . Suppose I counted apples including only whole, perfect fruit,
and you counted apples including rotten bits, mostly eaten cores, and weird,
unidentifiable fruit. We add up our count, but the floppy, unstable counting
rules mean the final number has lost a lot of its usefulness. The clearer the
shared edges, the more meaningful the number.
Sometimes those shared edges are not up to us. Some edges are given by
the natural world. The difference between an electron and a neutron,
between hydrogen and carbon, is almost certainly a real difference in the
world. These are natural categories —categories that exist in the world
independent of human choice. With natural categories, there are few to no
choices to make about where to draw the lines. The lines are given by the
world.
But the more we move into the social world—the world of cultures,
emotions, personalities, art, and technologies—the less likely we are to find

## Página 166

natural divisions. Instead, we are often faced with a complex spectrum, with
no clear lines given by nature. So if we’re going to count things, we have to
figure out a way to divide up that spectrum. The waters of the world are real
and natural, but the difference between the Atlantic Ocean, the Pacific
Ocean, and the Mediterranean Sea is an artifact of humanity. We took this
vast, complex, undivided thing and we drew a few clear lines in it to make
it easier for us to go through the social processes of naming, navigating, and
communicating.
A lot of the world is more like the Atlantic Ocean than a proton. Take, for
example, race. There is a social process by which we sometimes draw up
precise lines for sorting out race. I’m not saying there are no natural or
genetic differences between me—a moderately brown-skinned, black-
haired dude of largely Vietnamese ancestry—and my longtime gaming
buddy Andrew, a blond Minnesotan dude of mostly Swedish ancestry who
starts burning after three minutes in the sun. There’s a real biological
difference between us, just like there’s a real physical difference between a
point in the middle of the Atlantic and a point in the middle of the Pacific.
But those differences exist on a spectrum. In much of the natural world,
there’s lots of variation, but no clear lines. People decide where to draw the
lines.
These are social categories —those that human beings make up in some
important way. Some social kinds are entirely invented. The categories of
being “on welfare” or “a professional skateboarder” are obviously social
inventions. Other social categories are a bit subtler, like the Atlantic Ocean.
It’s easy to think these things are natural and uninvented—after all, that’s
real water, and you could drown in it. What we’ve added, as a social act, are
the sharp lines that break the world up into simple chunks. The vast waters
of the world are natural, but the “Atlantic Ocean” is a social category.
But the answer isn’t to stop drawing lines. We often have to draw sharp
lines for practical purposes. We need such clear lines to collect data
together. And we do it for other reasons: to decide whether you get a certain
right, like the right to vote, or the right to profit from a tribal casino. So we
draw a line that looks like this: You count as part of the tribe if you have
more than one-sixty-fourth of tribal ancestry. The world is fuzzy, but
corporations and governments usually act in binaries, so somewhere in
between, we need to translate the fuzzy world into easy-to-hold chunks—
and we need to do it in unison.

## Página 167

This is what classification manuals do. They standardize how we count
by standardizing how we draw lines in the world. They make sure we are
counting the same way, so that our counts can add up. They are the
foundation for data collection. Without a common classification system
there are no measures, no indicators, no metrics, no big data. But like maps,
classification systems also represent choices about what to pay attention to
and what to ignore.
By the way, saying that something is a social invention doesn’t mean
we’re denying its reality. Money, time, dates, and medical degrees are all
social inventions. These things are real. They affect the world; we live and
die by them. But we should also remember that we invented them; we
brought them into being. And we could still decide to make them differently
if we wanted. When we remember that we drew the lines in the first place,
it reminds us that we could choose to redraw them to better suit our
purposes.
HERE’S A CATEGORY I’VE BEEN THINKING ABOUT A LOT AS A parent: “screen
time.” There’s a bunch of empirical research about the problems of “too
much screen time.” It’s easy to get metrics about screen time, and many
people treat reducing screen time as a target for themselves and their kids.
But notice that when we’re using this category as a basis for gathering
data and setting targets, we’re implicitly accepting a set of decisions about
what to lump together. The category cares about the time a kid spends on a
device, like a tablet. But watch my eight-year-old kid on his tablet.
Sometimes he’s zoned out watching hypnotic YouTube videos about
unpacking toys. Sometimes he’s navigating through science videos about
how black holes work, or about the history of the world conflict leading up
to WWII—while peppering us with dozens of questions. Sometimes he’s
addicted to some dumb free-to-play clicker game. Sometimes he’s using a
drawing app to animate a story about his alternate dimensional selves
crossing realities to team up. Sometimes he’s learning to play chess through
TikTok videos and online matches. The category “screen time” lumps all
that stuff together. It represents a prior decision to ignore the differences
between watching YouTube clickbait and making art. It reflects a
presumption that what’s important is the delivery method—the device—and
that what you’re doing on the device matters far less.

## Página 168

But “screen time” is a very convenient category, because it’s easy to
measure. It has a mechanical edge, because we’ve drawn a line that can be
used and processed with mechanical procedures. If we wanted to sort by the
informational richness of YouTube videos or the degree of activity and
creativity in playing games on the device, we’d have to constantly be
making complex judgments, at every instance of data collection. But our
tablets can easily monitor the time they’re on. “Screen time” is an easy
category to gather vast amounts of data about, even if that data doesn’t track
what’s actually important.
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS REPRESENT CHOICES ABOUT WHAT to pay attention to .
This is the point of Geoffrey Bowker and Susan Leigh Star’s extraordinary
1
book, Sorting Things Out : Classification and Its Consequences . They look
under the hood of one of the most innocuous manuals, the ICD-10—the
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems, formulated by the World Health Organization. It provides
standardized codes for disease and injury, which are used as the basis for
worldwide statistics about disease, accidents, and mortality.
Every classification system, say Bowker and Star, is a set of decisions
about what’s important to store in institutional memory. Every category is a
bucket. We remember what’s at the edges of the bucket and forget the
differences between what’s inside. The US census, for example, includes
racial categories for Asian and Latino. This system remembers the
difference between Latino and Asian, and forgets the difference between
East Asian and South Asian.
Classification systems represent a set of decisions about what
information is worth recording. That’s part of their basic job, which is to
reduce the complex world into a simpler, lower-resolution set of chunks.
Classification systems simplify the world to make it more manageable; like
maps, they make decisions about what to draw our attention to, and what to
leave out.
You can see the interests in the classification manual written right into
the granularity of the categories. The ICD-10 has far finer granularity—
higher resolution, greater powers of attention—in some places, and far
lower granularity in others. For example, in the ICD-10, there are a large
number of very specific categories for the kinds of accidents typical in the

## Página 169

urban world. There are separate categories for falls from playground
equipment, falls from a bed, falls from a chair, falls from a wheelchair, falls
from a toilet, falls from other furniture, falls from steps, falls from a ladder,
and falls from scaffolding. But for the kinds of accidents typical in the
natural world, we only have falls from a cliff, falls from a tree, and “falls,
other.”
It is utterly obvious that the ICD-10 serves the interests of the urban over
the interests of the rural, or of, say, nomadic people living in a forest. The
ICD-10 has separate codes for injury by a paintball gun and injury by a
paper cutter, for god’s sake. And this is entirely predictable, say Bowker and
Star, because the ICD-10 was primarily written by people from the wealthy,
urban, Western world. And our shared categories determine what we can
institutionally monitor and target. If the ICD-10 doesn’t have a category
code for, say, poverty as a cause of death, then that information won’t get
collected and we won’t have ready data on it. And we won’t be able to
easily target its reduction.
Left to their own devices, people will carve up the world in different
ways, based on what they think is important. I have hundreds of categories
in my head for restaurants and food markets, but my brain just lumps all the
vaguely car-related stores into one big car-stuff category. And I have friends
who are the exact reverse. But when we count together, we need to
standardize a way of sorting the world. We need rigid categories, or our
counts won’t add up. We need to share categories. And that means, when
we are collecting data, we need to enforce a single set of interests and a
single system of attention across a broad set of people.
This is where we start to worry about the neutrality of data. Because data
collection is built on top of a hidden set of social decisions. Data is not
neutral, because classification systems are not neutral. If you guide yourself
with metrics, you can only target what you have data about. And somebody,
somewhere, made the decisions that control what we have data about.
This can lead to a feedback loop, say Bowker and Star. Let’s say your
medical database is set up to record matters of death and physical illness,
but not matters of despair and social isolation. So that database will gather
data and quantitative outcomes about death and physical illness but not
about mental health and social connections. Now let’s say I notice that gap,
and I try to speak up about the importance of social isolation and

## Página 170

connection. But I won’t have any data to back up my claims because the
system wasn’t set up to record that information in the first place.
The demand to always proceed from the data is not neutral, because it
binds us to past value decisions—usually by somebody else—about what
data was worth collecting.
WE NOW HAVE A CLEARER UNDERSTANDING OF THE HORSEMAN of Parts, who
wants replaceability. Parts wants a world of fungible things and fungible
workers. But remember, parts are replaceable because of a whole
background system that ensures that every instance of a given part is
identical in the right way, and that it will interface properly with the other
parts in the machine. Quarter-inch screws are replaceable not just because
we’ve carefully tooled our factories to make screws with identical shapes
but also because we’ve made nuts and screw holes to match those
tolerances. And to make those, we need standardized manufacturing tools.
Parts’s desire for fungibility spreads like a crystal, locking more and more
of the world into its pattern.
Classification systems are part of the background system that makes
workers fungible. The more mechanical the classification system, the more
fungible it makes workers. In particular, they make fungible the work of
data collection and interpretation. This is a powerful transformation. From
the perspective of a corporation, this means they can fire and hire workers
far more easily. But Parts is not just about profit. Parts helps enable much of
the data collection that powers science and medicine. Data is valuable
because there’s a lot of it, gathered by all sorts of people in a consistent
manner. Standardized categories enable large-scale data collection. But
standardized categories also prevent us from independently tailoring how
we divide up the world and deciding what we want to keep track of.
Classification systems shape what we collectively focus on and
remember. But if there’s not a category for something in the data-collection
system, we can’t build a metric to target it. Our categories set the limits of
what we can collectively care about.
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS AND DATA-COLLECTION SYSTEMS ARE incredibly
powerful tools. But we should always remember that we made those tools.

## Página 171

They are the products of human design and human choice. They are not
purely neutral reporters of fact; they were built to serve an interest.
So what interests do classification systems serve? Two answers:
First, any standardized system serves some set of interests—the interests
of whoever made the standardized system. What those interests are will
vary between each system. But for each classification system, somebody
drew the lines and decided what was worth remembering and what wasn’t.
Classification systems enshrine their designers’ particular choices into the
foundation of institutional memory.
Second, every system of standardization shares the same foundational
interests. Standardization serves the interests of those who operate at large
scale, who want to be able to coordinate mass groups of people. It aims at
the kinds of targets huge groups of people will understand. It doesn’t serve
the interests of people who want to do something peculiar, distinctive, and
small-scale.
The values inside classification systems, and all our other decisions about
what data to collect, leak up into metrics. They shape what we can target.
Metrics, once we have them, also exert pressure on all of us to use them.
They are the clear, common system of meaning. This is no accident; metrics
are designed to coordinate at scale. They are a universal language of
justification. And you don’t get that quick aggregation and convergence of
judgment if you depart from the metric. Their power comes from their
being shared precisely, which depends on keeping them stable and
inflexible at scale.
Metrics set what matters to us collectively. They are technology that
standardizes values.

## Página 172