# 28. Infrastructures of Play

## CHAPTER 28

Infrastructures of Play
while back, I noticed that I’d had the exact same dish of ratatouille
in four completely unrelated places.
A Ratatouille is this incredible peasant dish from Provence, France
—a summer stew of long-cooked vegetables. It’s some mixture of onions,
tomatoes, eggplant, and squash, stewed until it becomes this glorious deep
blend. In its natural state, ratatouille is incredibly variable. It’s a farmhouse
dish, originally made to deal with whatever your farm or your garden was
spitting out at you in massive abundance. Just by poking around through my
sprawling cookbook collection, I’ve made about ten completely different
ratatouilles. I’ve made recipes that have you long-caramelizing the onions,
cooking the eggplant forever, and adding tomato paste to really boost the
warm, caramel tastes. This results in an intensely sweet, caramelized
vegetable jam. I’ve made ones where you don’t brown anything, but wetly
simmer it down until it becomes delicious warm mush. I’ve made ones
where you just barely cook down some tomatoes and zucchini and onions,
so they’re still separate, with their own bit of crisp textures and distinct
juices. Each of these versions of ratatouille has its own style, its own soul,
its own reason for being. And the nice thing is once you learn them all, you
have also learned a possibility space. You can move around between the
extremes. The variety of possible manifestations of the dish creates a space
for your own culinary agency.
But then I had the exact same ratatouille in completely disconnected
locations. Three times were at different friends’ houses, and once at a
restaurant. I asked my friends, and it turns out that every single one of them
had used the exact same recipe. It was from The New York Times , and it was
the first recipe that showed up when they googled “ratatouille recipe.” And
I will admit, it is an extremely good recipe. It reliably produces a very

## Página 235

delicious result. But it is also only one out of thousands of different possible
versions. It represents one writer’s own taste for a particularly rich, jammy,
hyper-caramelized version with lots of powerful sweet flavors.
Interestingly, I think it was, for the author, the endpoint of a long journey of
decision-making and personalized fine-tuning, adjusting that recipe until it
met her own personal ideal. But for the rest of us, who meet this recipe as
the official statement of the food authority that is The New York Times , it’s
not. It is the record of some faraway person, made static and authoritative.
So here is the first problem: Centralizing technologies like Google
Search tend to invisibly decrease the diversity of food. Only a handful of
recipes tend to rise to the top. There is a quiet culinary deletion going on
right now, as a rich variety of ways of cooking gets displaced by the few
recipes that show up high on Google. But once that deletion gets going far
enough, it’ll be harder to notice. If you’ve never actually been exposed to
the variety of ratatouille recipes, and you’ve had only one recipe over and
over again, you’ll think that’s all there is, and all there can be. And if you
decide to cook that one recipe, you’ll be less likely to recognize that there’s
a decision space. You won’t realize you have the room to maneuver, that
ratatouille can be good in different ways. You’ll think dense and jammy is
the only way ratatouille can be good. The possibility of exercising choice is
hidden because the world has now been rearranged to decrease your
exposure to different possibilities.
This monolithic spirit is more explicitly embodied in a new kind of
cookbook: the kind that promises you they’ve done all the research to find
the One Perfect Recipe for everything. It contains the one right way to
make muffins, roast chicken, and poached eggs, all as singular recipes that
are absolutely guaranteed to work. These cookbooks usually present
themselves with an air of scientific rigor. They offer extremely precise
measurements and sequences, which give highly replicable results. They’ve
done the research for you. They’ve tried fifty ways to roast a chicken, and
now here is the very best one. But underneath that, of course, is a value
decision—an exercise of taste and preferences about how roast chicken
should be. But the book speaks in the voice of authority, and urges you to
settle on this cookbook and dismiss all the alternatives, because this one is
objectively the best.
What’s the antidote? I have a book on my shelf that exemplifies the
opposite tendency. It is a simple book, called Julia and Jacques Cooking at

## Página 236

Home . They take you through a lot of basic recipes: how to make a good
omelet or sauté some fish. And for every dish, they give you two
completely different recipes: Julia Child’s and Jacques Pepin’s. And next to
the recipes are sidebars in which they bicker with each other. They explain
why their version of the recipe is the way it is, what decision they made to
get which effects—and why the other person’s recipe misses the mark. The
book is formatted this way because it is the companion piece to an old PBS
TV show. It is the record of an argument—a rowdy conversation between
friends.
And the effect on me, as I learned to cook from this book, was to
undermine the sense that there is a single, correct way to cook. Instead, it
revealed every cooking act as a set of decisions through a network of
legitimate but different alternatives. You want your scrambled eggs to be
fluffier? Use higher heat and faster motion. You want them to be like sweet
pudding? Turn the heat down low, add more butter, and stir it for a long,
slow time. And once you learn those two endpoints of cooking scrambled
eggs, you will know how to improvise in between. The book uses
mechanical recipes to communicate—but by pairing different recipes and
introducing dissent, it frames them differently. It undermines the monolithic
authority of the classic cookbook, offering a landscape of variation, of
different choices you can make, guided by different tastes. It is an unsettled
cookbook. The paired recipes appear not as the Right and Official way to do
things, but as points on a wide spectrum. The book uses mechanical recipes
to create space for your culinary agency.
THE FORCES OF RULES, SCALE, PARTS, AND CONTROL ARE BAKED into the
infrastructure of the world. They are built into how institutions hand out
incentives and promotions; how we are measured and evaluated in school
and work and fitness; how corporations, governments, and media outlets
think and communicate and organize. That’s a lot to fight with just spunk
and fortitude. The problem is that our technologies and our infrastructure
hang around and constantly press on us, conditioning and shaping how we
interact and think. So we need to build supports for art and play into the
structure of the world—into our technologies, institutions, and
communities. Fight fire with fire, and fight infrastructure with
infrastructure.

## Página 237

We need infrastructures of art and infrastructures of play.
So how do you structure the world to create the space for play, and to
encourage it? What kind of technologies would you use?
The danger here is that if we aren’t careful, we’ll try to send a message of
play via a technology that undermines play. Remember Langdon Winner
and his analysis of the printing press. Maybe the inventors of the printing
press wanted to spread democratic control and empower the people; maybe
its users wanted to advance anarchy and decentralization. But none of that
matters as much as the basic material nature of the printing press itself: It is
a big, expensive piece of machinery. Its basic material nature pushes the
world toward centralized authority and control, no matter what you try to
use it to say.
I’ve seen a particularly ironic mirror of this in some of my fellow
philosophy professors. I have known other professors who will teach
classes about the problems of power, domination, and centralization. They
will rail against authoritarianism. They will rage gloriously about how
institutions rob people of their freedom to choose. At the very same time, in
the very same classes, these professors will implement rigid and punishing
grading scales, with tests written to enforce one very specific mode of
thinking. When it comes to the systems they build, it turns out that they are
entirely willing to use grading as an incentive to push around students’
attention and cares. And I suspect the authoritarian structure of their classes
might end up undermining the antiauthoritarian message of their lectures.
So we have to be very suspicious of how, exactly, we implement our
message of play.
THE TOOLS OF THE FOUR HORSEMEN DO NOT LEAD INEVITABLY to doom. You can
find, in certain places, people carefully using some of those tools but not
being dominated by them.
While I was writing this book, my five-year-old was hospitalized when a
particular nasty cold virus went into his lungs. He couldn’t breathe right and
starting flopping over; we rushed him to the hospital. It turned out he’d
inherited my asthma. He, too, will spend a lifetime dependent on modern
medicine for survival.
At the hospital, once they figured out that it was asthma-related, they
started him on something called an “albuterol protocol.” Albuterol is the

## Página 238

asthma rescue drug that I’ve spent my life using. They gave him a truly
massive dose and repeated it every four hours, gradually tapering it. The
tapering was controlled by an objective scale with fairly mechanical
checkpoints, like how much he was gasping, how wheezy he sounded, his
blood-oxygen level, and how much his belly was protruding with each
breath. There was a scoring system that added up the checkpoints and told
the doctors and nurses when to reduce his dose.
We had a great medical team, and they seemed to know exactly the
powers and limits of the albuterol protocol. They didn’t treat it as sacred
text. Many of them told me they had to mostly abide by the “objective”
point system, but they put air quotes around objective . They would say
things like “He looks better than the point system says right now,” or “He’s
on the edge of the next step in the point system, but he still looks pretty bad
to me, so I’m not going to taper yet.”
But they also mostly stuck to the protocol, and I could see why. Over
three days and nights at the hospital, mostly during the weekend shift, we
went through about seven different nurses and three managing doctors. And
if they’d each used their own individual gut, my kid would have gotten
pretty inconsistent care. The albuterol protocol enables a consistent plan of
action across a changing staff, who often couldn’t talk with each other at
length. That’s exactly what mechanical rules and edges are for: consistency
between ever-changing people. Mechanical rules cobble together a unified
plan of action out of an ever-shifting mass of humanity. And that’s very
important sometimes. But it was also important that every nurse and doctor
knew that the protocol was only a coordinating device. They didn’t blindly
follow it. They knew it didn’t pick up everything, but they also knew if they
strayed too far from it, their decisions would start to conflict with each
other’s. So they used it as a moderately strict anchor, which they would
depart from when things just didn’t feel right.

## Part of why it worked, though, is that the team was pretty small. This was

coordination across ten people, not ten thousand. When they departed from
the protocol, they could add a note to my son’s chart, or explain to each
other what was happening at the shift change. And I could tell that the team
trusted each other and trusted each other’s decisions to depart from the
protocol. Without those tight relationships, I doubt this could scale up. But
still, it’s one example of how we might use but not be ruled by the Four
Horsemen.

## Página 239

Standardization doesn’t always kill creativity. I’ve gotten deep enough
into yo-yos that I’ve started modding mine—changing the bearings and
axles and other little pieces out. It works because many of the parts are
standardized. I can swap out different axles and rubber friction rings and
weight rings to make it play and feel different, because most of the key
parts have been standardized to certain measurements, and there are a
bunch of little one-man companies and DIY modders who have made
alternate parts that I can swap around. With yo-yo modding, the parts are
fungible, but the purposes are left open.
Toys and games are also examples of how we can flirt with the Four
Horsemen without giving in to them. Games and toys often selectively use
mechanical rules, interchangeable modules, and interchangeable players to
enable play. They let us judo the powers of the Four Horsemen and use
them to serve our purposes.

## PART OF WHAT MAKES GAMES WORK SO WELL IS PRECISELY THEIR detachment

from worldly outcomes, the lack of a demand for interoperability. How do
we take these lessons from games and apply them to a highly scaled,
interconnected, and efficient world?
It’s incredibly hard, and I don’t have a great answer here. I’ve been
fighting for a decade with the one scoring system that is moderately under
my control: the grading system in my classes. I’ve been experimenting off
and on with various schemes of alternative grading and ungrading.
The ungrading movement has been preaching the gospel against grading
for years. Grades typically track easily testable qualities, like memorization,
and rarely track more important qualities, like curiosity, reflectiveness,
originality, and openness. Grades seem to kill curiosity and a love of
learning and replace it with a dead hyper-focus on tests. So, says the
ungrading movement, stop grading. Give the students work and give them
detailed feedback, but don’t give them summarizing letter grades at the end.
If you’re in an environment that requires you to grade them, give them a
guaranteed A on the first day, which will remove the incentive of grades.
And, so the theory goes, they’ll learn better.
I have tried ungrading with profoundly mixed results. I believe in the
ideal, and I want to believe in the theory. And when students are already
highly self-motivated and independent, it can work great. The most success

## Página 240

I’ve had with ungrading is in the philosophy of games class I teach to game
design students. It turns out that most game design students don’t care about
grades. They’re in it out of their deep love of games, and they will pay
attention to anything they think will help them make better games. But
ungrading has been a disaster in my introductory classes. The moment the
students figure out that the class is ungraded, the vast majority just stop
coming. I’d hoped ungrading would give them the freedom to find their
own love of the material. But they never actually explored the material long
enough to fall in love with it, because they stopped coming after the first
day.
The reasons are pretty obvious. My students have told me directly that
without the grading incentive, they won’t come. Some have even told me
that they found my class fascinating and exciting, but they can’t justify
spending the time on coming to class if they’re already guaranteed an A,
because their grade in their engineering class still hangs in the balance. So
they are forced to reallocate their time to where it will move the needle.
Some of them said they wished my class was graded, so they could justify
coming. So, grudgingly, I have given up on ungrading in many of my
classes.
But we can see the larger reason why. My grading system does not exist
in isolation. A college class is not a game. It does not exist in a magic circle;
its scores are not disconnected from the rest of the world. Class grades lead
directly to aggregate grade averages, which lead directly to scholarship and
job opportunities. And what matters to most of my students, at least for the
very next stage, is not what they learned, but what grade they got—because
that is how the world will evaluate them. The scoring system in my class is

## part of a larger scoring system, a world-spanning one, that is out of my

control. And if I try to detach myself from this large-scale scoring system, I
render my class irrelevant to the powers of the large-scale system.
I’ve done what I can—little moves, like offering students their choice of
the most interesting question from a long list on exams, or offering them the
chance to pitch wildly different alternate final projects. It restores a little bit
of room for exploration. But it isn’t much, and I haven’t figured out
anything better to do. The sweep and power of the large-scale scoring
system mostly beats out my little efforts.

## Página 241

THE SINGLE BEST TECHNOLOGICAL IMPLEMENTATION OF RANKINGS and metrics I
have ever seen is, surprisingly, on a board game review site. The site is, to
my eye, carefully designed to support reflective control and independent
values. Or maybe it’s not so surprising that the best use of rankings comes
from a board game review site. The community of board games is full of
people who, deep in their hearts, know that rankings and scoring systems
are there to be used, modified, and abused for their own enjoyment.
During the early 2000s, I spent a lot of time on a website called
Boardgamegeek.com. It was made by and for board game lovers, and
quickly became the hub of a sprawling community. The site is full of data
and rankings and metrics—but is structured to put the process firmly under
user control.
Any user can post a review of any board game; you can give it a rating
on a 1-to-10 quality scale and write a qualitative review. And every board
game does get a single numerical score based on all its reviews. The site
will also list all the games in its database ordered by their score. But my
sense is that most serious users of the site don’t put much stock in that
large-scale ranking. It quickly becomes obvious that the central ranking
draws from every kind of user—from the hardcore wargamers to lifestyle
Magic: The Gathering players to silly party gamers to newbies who have
only played a couple of games in their lives. The large-scale rankings turn
out to be pretty useless, and they are easy to ignore. But that is because the
site makes them easy to ignore, by defanging their authority through design.
What I, and most of the serious users, pay attention to is the massive,
sprawling database of reviews and rankings that cut in every direction. First
of all, the site lets anybody make their own ranked lists—called GeekLists.
There are so many different ranked lists, for things like “Top 20 Games by
Reiner Knizia,” “Top 15 Silly Party Games,” and “Best Simulations of the
Civil War.” Hundreds of thousands of lists, by tens of thousands of users,
that let you see a massive plurality of tastes. The site bombards you with
highly accessible ranking alternatives, made by different people, guided by
their different sensibilities.
You can also, whenever you find another user who likes similar stuff or
has interesting takes, drill into their profile and reviews. Everybody’s
profile page has a list of their top ten games of all time, and the top ten
games they’re playing right now. Another click and you can drill into their
individual rankings of games—usually accompanied by a lengthy text

## Página 242

review. And you can designate people whose tastes you share as your
GeekBuddies, and then get the site to generate averages based on only your
GeekBuddies’ rankings—and get yourself a tailored aggregated ranking,
generated by whose taste you trust. So you can quickly slice and dice the
data to create your own, personalized ranking—and you can easily change
how you’re slicing and dicing.
And, crucially, if you click on a game’s overall score, you’re immediately
taken behind the scenes. The site gives you instant access to all the
individual numerical ratings that went into that score, always paired with
their qualitative reviews. And it becomes incredibly obvious how different
people’s reasons are. One reviewer will explain how they gave the game a
10 because the game is perfect to play with their twelve-year-old son, who
is super-anxious about losing but loves crazy special powers. Another
reviewer will explain that the game is a fantastic goad for creativity if your
playing group is full of jokester storytellers—but if you focus on playing
the mechanics to win, it’s super boring. Yet another reviewer will explain
that this game is their absolute favorite, but also very fragile, and perfect
only if everybody is really into it and tries hard. But if the circumstances are
right, the game will give you this experience of pure brutality, a knife-fight-
in-a-phone-booth of aggressively restructuring each other’s incentives. The
qualitative reviews make it obvious how different people’s tastes are. It
makes prominent the chaos of context.
This is the opposite of objectivity laundering. It is, you might say,
subjectivity remindering. BoardGameGeek makes clear the superficiality of
the overall scores, by making it incredibly easy to plunge past them. It
makes all the weird nuanced qualitative stuff prominent and accessible.
I think the most important thing to say is that even though it presents a
number, BoardGameGeek doesn’t actually have a scoring system at all—
not in the sense we’ve been talking about. It doesn’t declare an official,
singular verdict, nor does it urge everybody to converge. The user interface
undercuts all that. It gives you different ways to sort the space, different
ways to find and generate radically different rankings. It gives you
informational access to an incredible diversity of games and an even more
incredible diversity of tastes and opinions of all those games. It presents a
single average rating for a game—and then presents a thousand alternatives.
It makes dissent and difference of opinion easy, and then records that
dissent and makes it easy to find. It is a database of argument.

## Página 243

BoardGameGeek is a technology tuned toward reflective control. It is an
infrastructure of art and an infrastructure of play. It—and the community
and way of life that surround it—encourages movement between different
realms, plunging into new experiences and backing off. It encourages
stepping back and evaluating games from an outside angle.
I spent a lot of time wrestling with myself, by the way, about whether to
put BoardGameGeek at such a prominent place at the end of this book. It
seems like such a silly, stupid example. It’s a board game review site, for
god’s sake. But that silliness is, perhaps, the point. Because what is
BoardGameGeek? Why was it made? Whose interests does it serve?
The technologies of metrics we’ve seen serve the interests of the Four
Horsemen. They are made for efficiency, often to extract money, and almost
always to optimize. They are there to summarize, to interconnect, to
organize people into cohesive acting wholes. They are usually made by
distant people, for distant purposes. But BoardGameGeek is a community-
made technology, designed by and for board game aficionados, to help them
find more games to appreciate. It is not tied to any certification or to any
need to generate a single score. It was made to facilitate a love of games—
and love does not have to converge.

## Página 244