# 15. Reflective Control

## CHAPTER 15

Reflective Control
o be involved with striving play is to have a particularly personal
and purposeful relationship with the goals of the game and its
T scoring system. A game player’s purposes aren’t dictated by the
scoring system. They use the scoring system to achieve their purposes. And
if a scoring system leads to boring, fruitless activity—the player can tinker
with it, modify it, or throw it away and try a different one.
We don’t always have that much control. Sometimes the world forces us
to play a particular game—a specific sport in high school gym class, or
basketball because it’s the path to money and status. Sometimes the world
presents us with addictive games that we play late into the night until we’re
exhausted and miserable, because the right buttons have been pressed in our
brain. Sometimes our schools and workplaces force gamification on us, to
make us more productive, more dialed into the daily grind. The perversity
of these forced games is that they fail to take advantage of what’s truly
special about games: the deep freedom to choose exactly the kind of action
that suits us.
Some of the freest game players are the DIY game modders—role-
players who hack their own games, board gamers who add house rules,
online communities who come up with goofy alternate ways to play
beloved video games. Take the world of speedrunning. In one of the early
classic speedrunning variants, you played Super Mario Bros. , but you
ignored the game’s standard point system. Instead, you just tried to get to
the end of the game as fast as possible. This involved finding and brutally
exploiting weird little hiccups in the game system—like spots where you
could glitch through the walls and skip past enemies.
Speedrunners ignore the official goal of the game. They’ve created a new
scoring system focused entirely on speed. They’re playing a different game

## Página 140

—a new one that they’ve invented by adding their own goals and rules to
the given software. This creates a different gaming experience—one in
which whole communities work together to find all the unexpected exploits
and gaps in the software to abuse the game mechanics in unintended ways.
Speedrunning often seems like an exercise not in playing the original game
but in creatively and cooperatively breaking it.
These are among the truest heroes of striving play: the game modders,
the indie tabletop role-playing-game hackers, the speedrunners. They are
taking full control of the games they are playing.
This is the special magic of games. We can try different games and see
how they feel. We can hop between them. We can try on different scoring
systems and constraint systems and see what we love. We can step into a
game, try on that agency, and experience the action on offer. And then we
can step back and ask ourselves if we want to play it again or play
something different. We can shift difficulty levels, change opponents. We
can modify our games, adding constraints, changing the goals. We can
explore, we can tinker, we can explode, we can create. That’s because
games are voluntary indulgences, and unlike the recalcitrant world, we can
choose them and sculpt them to give us exactly the experience we desire
and cherish.
Let’s call this relationship reflective control .
HOBBIES AND JOBS ARE SOMETHING LIKE FUZZIER GAMES. THEY usually come
vaguely prepackaged with a set of abilities and goals. If you’re a hiker,
you’re supposed to walk through nature and see beautiful new places. If
you’re gardening, you’re supposed to grow plants by planting and weeding
and fertilizing. If you’re a teacher, you’re supposed to educate students with
lectures and exercises. If you’re a Silicon Valley–type venture capitalist,
you’re supposed to make a profit by disrupting the status quo.
And I can specify my goals in different ways. If I’m a hiker, it matters if
I’m looking for the most beautiful hikes, the chillest ones, or the most
grueling. If I’m a teacher, it matters whether I want to encourage my
students to be more curious and free or to get the best-paying job. Each of
these things will radically shape what I do, as well as the shape and feel of
my daily life—and the effects I have on other people. And there’s no one
correct hobby, no one true goal for everybody. You have to screw around,

## Página 141

trying on different activities and then tinkering with the exact goals, until
you find something that fits your abilities, your personality, and your
particular place in the world.
The same may be true when we zoom out from hobbies and jobs and
look at our whole lives and our deep values. There are things you think are
important, that guide your decisions and choices in all terrains. Let’s call
these your values. Your values shape the life you lead. But, says the
philosopher Elijah Millgram, there’s no single correct set of values that will
work well for everybody. That’s because, once again, your values need to fit
you—they need to fit the particular person you are and the specific
circumstance you’re in. They need to fit your skills, your personality, the
place you live, the communities you live with, and the possibilities the
world has left open for you.
And you find out which ones fit, says Millgram, through experiment. You
have to actually try living your life by devoting yourself to money, or
learning, or travel. And then you get feedback; you find out whether you
flourish or wilt. Sometimes you try on a new value and you become happy,
engaged, and full of zest. This value fits you. And sometimes you try on a
value and you end up bored, miserable, and exhausted. That value doesn’t
fit. This is a signal that you should adjust your values—which you can do
1
by changing hobbies, changing jobs, or tweaking your goals.
And this is true on a larger scale, too. We have values that fit our
particular communities, in their particular contexts. Jane Jacobs, the urban-
planning theorist, had a lovely observation about the distinctive values of
2
city folk: People in cities deeply value privacy, because it is so precious in
dense urban areas.
People who aren’t from cities often value a certain kind of friendliness—
making eye contact, having friendly chats with anybody you run into,
introducing yourself to strangers. Sometimes, a person will move to a big
city, like New York, and at first the people there seem painfully unfriendly.
The city people refuse to make eye contact, are hostile toward attempts at
chatting, and radiate annoyance at what seem like perfectly normal social
overtures. They seem like total assholes. But if newcomers spend more time
in the city, that apparently unfriendly behavior will start to make perfect
sense. Because a city like New York is too crowded, too teeming with
people. In the city—on the bus, on the subway, on the streets—you spend
so much of your life surrounded by other human beings that if we valued

## Página 142

chatty friendliness, everybody would lose their minds from the constant
social intrusion. So people in the big city typically come to place an intense
value on respecting privacy— on not making eye contact most of the time,
on not making conversation most of the time, on leaving people alone,
especially if there are any signals that they want to be left alone (earbuds in,
head down at their phone).
The point isn’t that friendliness or privacy is the better value. It’s that
there are different ways of life, and different contexts for living, that clearly
suit different values. Putting a high value on friendliness usually suits the
rural context better, and putting a high value on respecting privacy suits the
context of dense cities with crowded subways better. Add to this local
variance the huge complex variability of human personalities—the massive
differences in what we find frustrating or joyful—and it becomes obvious
why we can’t have one-size-fits-all values.
So we need to try out values and see if they fit—and if they don’t, we can
adjust. When we engage in this kind of reflective control, we get values that
are tailored to fit our particular personalities and our place in the world.

## METRICS DISCOURAGE REFLECTIVE CONTROL.

What is so appealing about metrics and value capture? Making decisions
is complicated when we’re exposed to the full complexity of life. Let’s
narrow it down to just one aspect of life—say, parenting. Every day I’m
making decisions about what kinds of food my kids should eat, what shows
they can watch and games they can play, whether it’s OK to let them play in
our backyard unattended or let them scramble up that medium-size boulder
on their own. There is so much information to consider—all the nutritional
science and developmental psychology and economics and physical risk
factors. But beyond the science and the facts, there is the even more
nauseating tangle of what matters. In most of these decisions, I’m choosing
between radically different values. I am trying to balance my kids’ physical
safety with the value of developing self-trust and independence. I am
deciding between the value of a carefree childhood and preparation for a
competitive job market.
It’s no surprise, then, that we crave relief from all that complexity.
Games offer us one form of relief, an experience of absorption in an
alternate, purified world. When I’m climbing, all that matters is my body

## Página 143

and the rock. My entire consciousness can pour into that slender universe—
the precise angle and texture of a few holds, the exact way my hips are
turned and my feet are pointed. And that simplification, that glorious
narrowness happens because in a game, we have sharply reduced what
matters. In climbing, all that matters is getting to the top of the rock.
Everything that doesn’t contribute to that one clear goal can just fall away.
This cuts the world down to a simpler, more manageable nub. Games give
us a moment of value clarity.
In games, simplifying our values is safe, because games are temporary.
They don’t settle anything permanently for us; we can easily step back and
renegotiate the rules and scoring systems if we want. Metrics, on the other
hand, attempt to simplify the real world permanently. They promise to
reduce everything to a manageable size. They offer us the gamelike
pleasures of an utterly clear purpose.
In most games, clarity is completely and happily artificial. The points are
made up and detached from the world. They’re a temporary goal that we
take on for the sake of a fascinating process. But metrics are different.
Metrics are institutional systems designed to measure some independent
quality. Maybe it’s health, or education, or well-being. Metrics make a
lasting claim about what is actually important. This is when we have to start
worrying about the possibility of error—of a mismatch between the clarity
of the score and the density of the real world.
And metrics make a second offer. They don’t just promise to simplify our
internal decisions. They also promise to simplify the social world—to ease
the burden of making ourselves understood. Metrics offer a universal and
easily communicable value system. They promise social value clarity.
For many of us, a core experience of life is the pain of being
misunderstood. Our weird private whims, the odd bits of beauty we cherish,
our habits that make our lives make sense—it is so hard to explain this stuff
to other people. It is so hard to explain to people why I have become
obsessed with perfecting this one particular Sichuan dish, why this lesser-
loved GZA album glows with energy for me. Value capture pops us out of
that problem by putting us on a universal value currency.
Metrics make you an offer: If you accept this prefabricated, public value
system into your heart, you will become instantly comprehensible. You will
gain access to a whole world of ready-made justifications. Your successes
will become clear and inarguable. Metrics make values mechanically clear.

## Página 144

And the more public the metric I attune myself to, the more universally
comprehensible my actions will be. This might explain why some people
will endlessly seek more money, even when they already have far more than
they could ever use. This is not just normal selfishness. Some people will
wreak havoc on the world while driving themselves into misery—into
stressed-out, overworked, friendless exhaustion—all in their pursuit of
higher numbers in their bank account. Because money is the ultimate shared
scoring system, the system that is maximally legible to the largest chunk of
the world. They have been dominated by the clarity of the score.
When you are value-captured by a clear external metric, your reasons
become perfectly public. All you have to give up is tailoring your values to
fit your own peculiar self, in the light of your own particular experiences.
With value capture, you are setting your values using tools that are designed
to be rigid, inflexible, and insensitive—precisely so they can be instantly
comprehensible at scale.
Metrics discourage reflective control, because their central promise—that
we can hop onboard a prefabricated and shared value system—requires that
we submit ourselves to an external, rigid system of values.
GAMES ENCOURAGE REFLECTIVE CONTROL. IN AESTHETIC STRIVING play, we take
on scoring systems temporarily . And the scoring system offers us clear and
mechanical standards for success, which make it so much easier to try on.
This is part of what makes games so compelling, so absorbing. For a while,
we know exactly what we’re trying to do, and exactly how well we’ve done
it.
But then the game ends and we step back. We put aside the scoring
system and its conception of success. And then we ask ourselves if it was
worth it to play the game—if we enjoyed it, if it was fun or satisfying. We
evaluate the mechanical scoring system from a standpoint outside
mechanical scoring systems.
Games encourage us to take on scoring systems voluntarily, with a fuller
understanding of the kind of life they will shape for us. We can adopt them
if and when they serve our interests. Games encourage us to choose and
tailor our goals to suit our own needs, precisely because they are temporary
and disposable.

## Página 145

Consider the yo-yo passions of Tsukasa Takatsu—a minor saint, beloved
of a very tiny sect of passionate yo-yo players. Takatsu had gotten bored
with the complicated tricks of the modern yo-yo era. He wanted to see how
much depth and perfection he could find in simplicity. So he devoted
himself to repeaters. A repeater is a very specific kind of yo-yo trick. It
begins and ends in the same string formation, so you can do it on an infinite
loop. It is an ouroboros of play.
The best repeaters are simple and elegant, but a little bit mystifying. You
start your trick—the yo-yo’s looping and hopping around, the string’s
getting more and more tangled—and then suddenly there’s a little hop of
the yo-yo, a slight twist of the finger, and the string formation resolves. All
your tangled knots disappear—and you’re right back where you started, on
a plain straight string.
Takatsu says the restrictions of the repeater format make it easier for him
3
to find the beauty of trick structure. He finds in them an elegance akin to
Japanese haiku poetry. He’s spent a decade inventing and filming hundreds
of new repeaters, every single one meticulously documented on his
YouTube channel. They are always filmed the same way. There is music—
sometimes ambient, sometimes jazz, sometimes classical, occasionally
punk. He is usually wearing a baseball cap, and he is always in socks. He
repeats the trick several times, finishes, looks up briefly at the camera, and
walks off to the left. He never speaks.
I have learned some of his tricks, and they are indescribably,
incandescently beautiful. This is a strange thing to confess, but one of his
repeaters was so gorgeous that when I got it to work for me, I actually cried.
It was moving in a way I’d never been moved before. Then I texted my
friends about it, and they told me I was a total weirdo.
But the beauty of Takatsu’s repeaters is incredibly hard to access for
people who don’t yo-yo. It’s a form of beauty written in an esoteric
language of momentum and knots. It is a structural, mathematical beauty,
made visible and tactile. Doing his tricks feels like being inside a Möbius
strip. Takatsu’s tricks remind me of the novelist and engineer Robert
Musil’s comment that the love for elegant thinking is “a complicated
4
passion for thrift.”
Takatsu is a poet of topology, spending untold hours of loving invention
and practice on his art. But the wider world will never really notice. He has
invented, and filmed, over two hundred repeater tricks; most of these have

## Página 146

only a few hundred views each. His aesthetic is profoundly illegible and
anti-impressive: He aims at a kind of smooth perfection that makes it look
absolutely easy. His tricks are a special gift for those few yo-yoers who
recognize the beauty of a haiku written into string.
Takatsu could walk this path because he didn’t want to compete and yo-
yo was mostly disconnected from his livelihood. And I can ignore the
competition scene, be moved by his tricks, and devote myself to learning
them, because nothing ties me to any particular vision of success. Nothing
hinges on whether I chase repeaters or hard competition tricks, or whether I
succeed or fail at any of those things. Because yo-yo, in the end, is stupid.
So I can reconceive what counts as success there as I please.
Games matter because games don’t matter.
SO WHAT MAKES SCORING SYSTEMS OFTEN SO DELIGHTFUL AND exploratory in
games and often so soul-deadening in metrics?
Games give us a safe way to use mechanical scoring systems. These
scoring systems can’t directly target those weird deep, subtle inner joys and
experiences, but they can indirectly encourage those things. Remember the
difference between a goal and a purpose. In games, there is a local goal,
which we directly target in the moment. And there is a larger purpose,
which is the real reason we play. I climb to relax and clear my head and feel
the bliss of sensitive, elegant movement. But I don’t pursue those in the
moment. In the moment, I just try to climb the damn rock.
In games, mechanical evaluation procedures are confined to the in-game
goals. Our larger purposes need not be mechanical. We can in fact nudge,
steer, and modify the mechanical scoring system to satisfy our weirdest,
most inchoate desires. I can decide that the pursuit of harder, faster yo-yo
tricks isn’t giving me pleasure, and switch to the goal of learning Takatsu’s
elegant repeaters. I can shift the experience point system in my tabletop
role-playing game to make it generate more sadistic hilarity.
But that requires taking control and being willing to customize the
mechanical scoring system. We become something like a game designer for
our own lives, trying games and modding them to fit our purposes. We can
use the mechanical scoring system as a tool to approach something subtler,
more sensitive, more intimate. We can also do this in fuzzier practices, far
away from mechanical scoring systems. We can get involved in a hobby or

## Página 147

a job, following someone else’s lead for a while and learning to see its
subtle value. And then we can start screwing with it, changing the way we
do it—which methods we use, what our goals are—to tailor it to us.
But that fine-tuning requires a certain degree of freedom—the ability to
change the scoring system. Games make that easy. But you might ask: Why
can’t we just do that with any scoring system? Can’t we simply decide to be
more playful with metrics? Why can’t we treat our public ranking systems
more like games?
The answer is that metrics aren’t just passive things that we can freely
use in any way we wish. Metrics push back. They resist our attempts to
bend them to suit our interests. And then they reach out and transform the
world, in a way that makes playfulness and reflective control incredibly
hard.
Why? This is where we’re going next.

## Página 148

## Part 4

S TA N D A R D I Z E D VA L U E S

## Página 149