# 7. The Beauty of the Process

## CHAPTER 7

The Beauty of the Process
ames are designed systems that serve a purpose. But what purpose?
To understand that, we need to understand what experiences game
G designers are trying to create, and what experiences game players
are trying to have. We need to understand the unique delightfulness of
games. And I suspect that we often misunderstand games, because we’re
looking for their value in the wrong place.
What’s magical about games—what’s different from so many other art
forms—is that in games, you act. You analyze the information, you make
decisions, you try to enact your will upon the game world. And well-
designed games make beautiful action more likely. They call it forth. Good
games don’t tell you what to do, exactly. They don’t puppet you into beauty.
They leave space for your freedom, for you to choose and decide and act
and react. But they create the background conditions that make it likely that
your own actions will be elegant, fascinating, and thrilling. The beauty is in
the process—in what it feels like to be doing the thing. And games help
steer you toward finding beauty in your own actions—in finding the answer
yourself, figuring out the right move yourself, instinctively reacting out of
your own trained skill.
This is what makes games unique as an art. In traditional art, the beauty
is outside the viewer, in the art object itself. It is external beauty. But with
games, much of the beauty shows up in the players’ own actions—in the
feeling of their own bodies and minds in action. And games lead you there,
help you to find your way into elegant action or comical failure. Games
help us find internal beauty, in our own bodies and minds.
But sometimes game players get anxious about the cultural status of
games. When faced with the game skeptics—the people who say that games
are a waste of time, or that they can never be real art—game lovers

## Página 72

sometimes retreat from what makes games truly unique. Gamers often end
up trying to defend their games by talking about how much they’re like
other, more familiar forms of art. People will try to talk up video games by
pointing out how much they’re like movies—the beautiful graphics, the
cinematic soundtrack, the emotional story, the well-written characters, the
serious and philosophical themes. They try to find traditional, external
beauty in the game object itself. This tends to put the focus on a very
particular kind of game: single-player narrative video games, the kind with
a lot of prewritten cutscenes and dialogue and scripted stories. And it tends
to leave out the really, purely game-y games: poker and The Mind and
Super Mario Odyssey . Most important, it leaves out the distinctive heart of
games: the part where we actually make choices and do things. And this
seems kind of weird—as if we’re so anxious to assimilate games to Serious
Art that we’ll trample over what makes them truly special.
This kind of thing happens with every new art form. When new
technologies birth new mediums for art, you often see these bids for
respectability. People try to force the new medium away from what it’s
uniquely good at, to make it look more like older, more familiar art forms.
Photography, for example, is good at things that painting is not: clarity,
freezing a particular real moment, capturing lots of unexpected details. But
when photography first showed up, it was too jarring and weird for a lot of
people’s artistic sensibilities. Most people couldn’t see it as real art. So
early “art photographers” tried to use every method they could to eliminate
that clarity and quickness. Even as cameras got faster and faster, people
were still photographing highly controlled, static images—like your classic
bowls of fruit—in an effort to resemble high-art paintings. They smeared
petroleum jelly on the lens to blur the photographs to look like
impressionist paintings; they cut up the negatives with razor blades to give
them that scribbly look of fine-art drawings. They resisted letting
1
photography do what it was naturally good at: capturing moments in crisp
detail.
It wasn’t until decades later that a new generation of photographers, like
Henri Cartier-Bresson, would embrace the unique powers of photography.
Photography, said Cartier-Bresson, was special because it let you capture
2
that fleeting moment. He embraced the fact that photography wasn’t
completely under the photographer’s control. Photography can surprise you;
you can discover weird details and energy in your shot well after you took

## Página 73

it. To truly love photography is to embrace what is peculiar about the
medium: the strange balance between control and surprise.
So what’s unique about games? In the traditional arts, the beauty is in the
art object itself. It’s in the painting, the song. It’s the sculpture that’s
radiantly gorgeous, that novel that’s bittersweet and moving. But in games,
so much of the time, the beauty shows up not in the game but in the player.
Games help mold, shape, and heighten beauty in the player’s own actions.
Because here is the fascinating thing about our relationship with games:
When I make a precise series of jumps in Super Mario Odyssey , that’s me
doing it; it’s my skill that is beautiful. It’s my mind, my body, my choices
that let me weave through the world. In a sense, that elegance is mine. But a
game’s design can make particular kinds of elegance much more likely. The
designers of Super Mario Odyssey created the possibility for that kind of
high-energy, glorious timing. They tweaked the physics engine to make
those jumps just barely possible. They shoved collectible objects into an
environment that asks me to improvise wild, creative jumping sequences.
And then they gave me a scoring system that told me to collect those
objects.
The game prepares the way for me to be beautiful, and it summons forth
that beauty by shaping and channeling my actions. Who is responsible for
that beauty? It’s a complex muddle, some weird mixture of game designer
and player. But if we are too fixated on the old paradigm of art—if we are
only willing to find beauty in the stable object made by some faraway artist,
if we refuse to respect beauty when it shows up in our own fleeting actions
—then we’ll miss the most important bit.
I PLAYED CLASSICAL PIANO IN MY YOUTH—NOT PARTICULARLY well or with any
great fervor but with the kind of mediocre dutifulness of a kid forced by his
parents to play piano to pad out his college résumé. I did discover, though,
this profound difference in what composers cared about. Beethoven didn’t
give a damn about what it feels like for the pianist to play his pieces. You
could tell that he had this grand sonic architecture in his head, and you just
have to force your fingers to make those sounds for him. Chopin, on the
other hand, clearly loved the physical act of playing the piano: the feel of it,
the expressive agility of it. And he wrote music that gave the pianist that
feeling. To play Chopin is to feel beauty radiating from your fingers into the

## Página 74

music. When the music is soaring, your right hand will have to jump in
graceful hops back and forth over your left hand. When the music is
delicate, your hands glide quietly over the keyboard. When it’s tense and
dramatic, you end up pounding down on the piano with tangled fingers, the
agony of the music echoed in the deliciously awkward twists that the notes
force your hands into.
But people rarely talk about that part of Chopin. Pianists will sometimes
mention it in offhand moments. But it’s not the officially important part that
we’re supposed to study and appreciate and write books about. The art
culture I grew up in—that of Western Europe and its American kin—mostly
just ignores the beauty of process, the beauty of doing. It ignores how the
performance feels to the performer, on the inside. You never see a review of
a ballet that says “Well, it sure looked beautiful, but, man, it must have been
pure torture for the dancers.”
You can see this emphasis of outward appearance over inner elegance
everywhere. Take cookbook reviews. I remember, back when I was learning
to cook, desperately trying to pull together impressive recipes from the
kinds of fancy cookbooks written by chefs at famous high-end restaurants
—like The French Laundry Cookbook . And, I will admit, what I produced
was quite delicious. But the act of cooking was miserable. The recipes
hadn’t originally been designed to be cooked by one person. They were
made for a whole professional kitchen, one that had somebody on staff to
come in in the morning and create a set of different sauces and stocks, so
that the line chefs could grab a bit of this and a bit of that. The cookbook
had awkwardly compressed all that for the home chef. One recipe forced
you to get five different sauces simmering simultaneously—an exhausting
and stressful exercise. The authors obviously didn’t care about how the
process felt to the cook who actually had to make the goddamn thing.
In his cookbook on braising, Michael Ruhlman explains why you’re
supposed to dust the meat in flour and brown it in butter before you do the
long, low-and-slow braise. It deepens and enriches the flavor, for sure. But
3
the most important reason you do it, he says, is because it smells amazing
for the cook.
Yet cookbook reviews almost never talk about the joys of cooking—
which is funny because I often spend way more time on the cooking part
than the eating part. The official culture ignores the beauty of the process,

## Página 75

trains us not to pay attention to how it feels to act, to believe that joyous
action doesn’t matter.
And that disinterest in the process seems to be on the rise. Take the
modern trend toward “perfect” recipes that have been “tested in our food
laboratory” and are usually presented in a very scientific mode. These
recipes tell you precise times and temperatures. I tried a recipe for french
fries that had you cut potatoes into exactly ¼″ × ¼″ × 2″ fries, then bring 4
cups of oil up to 375 degrees, drop in exactly 1 pound of precut potatoes,
which would drop the oil temperature below 350 degrees, and then you had
to carefully bring the oil temperature up and monitor it. When the
ingredients are sufficiently standardized, this script will, in fact, produce
reliably perfect results. But it sucks much of the joy out of the process.
We’ve taken a deeply aesthetic, deeply satisfying set of sensory interactions
with food—smelling it, tasting it, hearing it sizzle, being sensually
immersed in the smells and sounds of food, and then making decisions
triggered to those smells and sounds—and replaced it with staring at a
stopwatch and a thermometer, mechanically executing a precise procedure.
There are no choices, no judgments, no improvisation, and no sensory
intuition. There is only following the rules.

## PART OF THE REASON WE MISS THE BEAUTY OF GAMES IS THAT we don’t have

great language to describe these kinds of experiences. Quiet, unnamed
things slip through our fingers and mind so easily. So let’s make up some
names.
There are two kinds of beauty in the world, one dominant in the cultural
imaginary, and the other just as common in the world but neglected in the
eyes of official art culture. Let’s call them object beauty and process beauty .
Object beauty is the familiar kind—the beauty of paintings, movies, ballet,
novels, and rap. It’s what we usually think about when we think about art.
It’s the beauty that’s in the art object itself. It’s the movie that’s bittersweet,
the novel that’s inventive and weird.
Process beauty is different. It is the beauty of your own actions and
choices. There is no easy line between a beautiful thing and the observer of
beauty, between object and audience.
Process beauty is everywhere. Sometimes it happens spontaneously and
accidentally. When you open a cupboard and a glass falls out and somehow

## Página 76

you sweep your hand under it and catch it with a graceful little motion—it
is your body, your movement that is graceful. But other times, we design
artifacts specifically to get us there, to encourage and sculpt beautiful
action. This is process art . And games are often designed to encourage and
shape our action into something more beautiful, more thrilling, more funny.
Games help us find our way into actions worth savoring.
But it’s not just games. Process art has been all around us, all along, but
we’ve been mostly taught to ignore it. I am inordinately fond of certain
social food rituals, like hot pots and fondues. I grew up in a Vietnamese
household, and my favorite special dinner was Vietnamese hot pot. You put
a Bunsen burner on the table, put a little pot of deliciously sour broth on
top, get it simmering, and then lay out platters of uncooked foods: thin
slices of raw beef, shrimp, mushrooms, onions. And then everybody cooks
together, at the table. Some of the happiest memories I have with my family
are of us all clustered around the little hot pot, arguing about whose shrimp
was whose, yelling at each other for overcooking the beef or eating all the
mushrooms.
This is definitely not the best way to get the most delicious food. Having
a gang of people cooking simultaneously at the dinner table is far too
chaotic for optimal results. But there is a glory, still, in the process of the
hot pot—a weird, comic, intimate social glory. The hot pot is too small.
There’s not enough space for all the people and implements jockeying
around. I have started to suspect that this is by design—or, at least, that the
ensuing joyful chaos is part of why we keep returning to these things.
The hot pot ritual is a close cousin to games. It is a work of process art.
The weird too-smallness is actually a design feature, a clever bit of social
engineering, which leads to elbows knocking, chopsticks crossing, and
confusion about whose mushroom is whose. Making tasty food is the goal
—and in this case, that’s an outcome that’s valuable in itself. But we have
also engineered a particularly awkward, inconvenient way of making that
food that leads to all kinds of joyful chaos and argument. It reminds me,
weirdly, a little bit of Twister —a game designed to get people tangled up,
confused, and falling over each other, all for the hilarity of the failure.
Traditional art culture, when faced with the weirdness of games, often
searches for beauty in the game itself—in the graphics, the music, the
script, the fixed story. But to truly understand why many of us play games,

## Página 77

we need to look at the process sculpted by the game—at what it feels like
for the player to be playing.
I TAKE A PARTICULAR INTENSE PLEASURE IN A CERTAIN KIND of spatial
manipulation. In college, my undergraduate dorm was set up not along a
normal horizontal hallway, but vertically, up a set of winding narrow stairs.
On moving day, people would sometimes get stuck trying to get a couch or
a bookcase up and down those stairs. I lived for those moments. I would
poke my head out and casually offer to help, like this wasn’t the literal best

## part of my day. I’d stare at the couch, turning it around and around in my

mind, until I could see the exact weird rotation that would let it slip over
and around that annoying banister, underneath the lamp, and slide on up.
Later in life, I loved helping my friends move. I took intense pleasure in
that last moment, at the end of a miserable day, where we had to jam too
much crap inside a little moving van or a tiny hatchback car, and I had to
carefully imagine every rotational possibility.
These might have been rare pleasures for me—a few isolated moments in
a lifetime. But now I don’t have to wait around for those rare moments of
stuck couches and overstuffed moving vans. Because now there’s Tetris .
This is a game that takes the pleasure of rotating objects to fit and
concentrates it, perfects it, and gives it to you as much as you could
possibly want. Tetris takes the joy and pleasure, the feeling of internal grace
and brilliance, that arises haphazardly in ordinary life, and distills it.
4
The philosopher John Dewey says that every piece of art takes some
aspect of ordinary life and crystallizes it. Fiction takes the ordinary act of
telling what happened to you and sharpens it—finds unified stories with
coherence and meaning. Painting takes the ordinary act of looking and
concentrates it. And games take ordinary, day-to-day practical action —
making decisions and doing stuff—and refines it. Crystallized action, pure
and uncut.
This is why many of us adopt scoring systems in games. The scoring
system aims us at something simple and obvious: faster times, higher levels.
That is the goal of the game. But the goal is not the purpose; it is not why
we play. We choose to adopt the scoring system, and our local goals become
mechanically clear for a while, because that gives us a gateway to lovely,
gorgeous action. Rules and goals are part of the art of the game designer.

## Página 78

Their mechanical clarity lets a game designer sculpt action with precision
and place us, more precisely, at the doorway to a beautiful process.
Striving players may adopt a mechanical scoring system temporarily, but
our real purpose is often larger and stranger. What we want is an inner
feeling: the elegance in our own body moving, poetry in our mind thinking.
What we want is fun, interest, and beauty, emerging from within our own
acting selves.
In games, we use a scoring system as part of an artistic medium—to
precisely shape a kind of action. But the reasons we have for engaging in
that action can be deeply gushy. Our real reasons for play lie beyond the
score.

## Página 79