# 11. Mechanical Values

## CHAPTER 11

Mechanical Values
e have a choice. We could leave our goals and values fuzzy. We
can value things like wisdom, communication, friendship,
W community. These are recognizable and very human values, but
without further sharpening, we will probably disagree viciously about how
to apply them. Or we can make our values mechanical. The more explicit
and mechanical we make our goals and values, the easier it will be to
coordinate, and the easier it will be to figure out exactly how well we’ve
done. Mechanical values give us a particular kind of objectivity. They give
us a repeatable procedure for evaluation, which different people can follow
consistently.
But it can also feel like mechanical values are systematically missing out
on something else, something crucial—something hard to name but
absolutely essential to human life. To get a clearer grip on what that
something is, we need to understand what happens when we change
between fuzzy values and mechanical values.
I’ve been using the term mechanical loosely, but now we need to dive in
and figure out exactly what it means to have mechanical edges and values.
To do that, we need to do about as dorkily philosophical a thing as I can
imagine. We need to figure out exactly what counting is and what happens
when we count things . And then we will see how we can make counting
easier, by making the process mechanical—and how that changes what
we’re counting in the first place. Because how, exactly, we count things—
and how we change the world to make it more countable—is one of the
most important hidden drivers of the modern world.

## Página 103

COUNTING IS SORTING. WHEN WE COUNT THINGS, WHAT WE’RE actually doing is
sorting them into categories. Suppose I need to count the adults and the
children in a room. I need to be able to recognize who the adults are and
who the children are. I need a sorting rule to tell the difference. (And even
if you tell me to count only one thing, I’m still sorting. If you tell me to
count the kids, I’m still sorting kids from adults.)
There are lots of different sorting rules I can use. Here’s one: Count as
adults the people who seem mature to me, and count as children the people
who seem immature. This rule is pretty fuzzy at the edges and requires a lot
of judgment on my part. It tells me to lean on my own intuition, which is an
unpredictable resource. When we use fuzzy rules like that, different people
will often make very different judgment calls. Alternatively, I can use a
mechanical sorting rule: age eighteen and over counts as adult; under
eighteen counts as child. This rule requires no subtlety or discerning
judgment; everybody should be able to apply it in the same way. It shuts out
any room for intuition and subjectivity. It closes the door to bias. And in the
voting case, it’s clear why the mechanical sorting rule is better. But in other
cases, we may want to abandon the mechanical sorting rule and let people
exercise less explainable forms of judgment. Because mechanical rules also
shut out sensitivity and intuition honed by long experience.
So what, exactly, are mechanical rules? And what are the costs and
benefits of using them over fuzzier kinds of rules? We can turn for help to
the intellectual historian Lorraine Daston, who has given us a profound
investigation into the nature of a rule.
Historically, says Daston, we’ve used three incredibly different ideas of a
1
rule. The older conceptions are nonmechanical, but the newest one is
highly mechanical.
The first kind of rule is a principle . This is a general abstract statement
about what to do—but there are exceptions. A principle isn’t meant to be
applied unthinkingly and automatically. It’s supposed to be applied with
judgment and care—and the knowledge that the rule won’t always work.
But to recognize the exceptions, you have to understand the reason behind
the rule, and that cannot be fully captured in the explicit language of the
rule.
When I was taking creative writing classes, my teachers always told us
the rule: “Show, don’t tell.” That means when you’re writing fiction, don’t
give the big, general conclusions directly. Describe the action in its details

## Página 104

and let the reader come to the conclusions themselves. Don’t just say that a
character is manipulative and evil; show them being two-faced, or being
cruel when they think nobody is looking. For the most part, good fiction
follows the “show, don’t tell” rule. But if you search through great
literature, you’ll find plenty of exceptions. Tolstoy starts Anna Karenina
with one of the finest opening lines in all of literature: “Happy families are
all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.” This is one of
the most beloved moments in Western literature, and Tolstoy is telling and
not showing.
I was the kind of smart-ass who loved pointing out exceptions like this.
But my creative writing teacher said that I was missing the point. “Show,
don’t tell” is a general guideline, not an absolute rule. It works most of the
time, and beginners would do well to generally follow it. But if you really
know what you’re doing—if you understand the deep reason underneath the
simple rule—you know when to break it. You have to understand how most
fiction builds its absorptive reality out of concrete sensory details and the
particulars of small-scale action. And then you will recognize those rare
circumstances when you can boldly tell to great effect without destroying
that absorptive reality.
In essence, principles are generalities meant to be applied with care,
judgment, and discretion. A principle is useful as a rough guide, but you
can’t just apply it unthinkingly, because there are always exceptions.
However, there’s no complete list of all those exceptions, no explicit
flowchart guaranteed to catch them all, so you need to apply the rule with
an open mind, sensitive to the possibility that this case may be an exception.
The second kind of rule is what Daston calls a model . This is an ideal—a
role model, an exemplar. Daston turns to an old religious manual, the Rule
of Saint Benedict . And it turns out the rule here isn’t some explicit statement
in words. The rule is Saint Benedict himself, the actual historical person. To
follow the rule of Saint Benedict isn’t to follow some explicit procedure,
but to model yourself on Saint Benedict, to do what he would have done.
This is the kind of rule embodied in mottoes like What Would Jesus Do?
And notice that when you apply a model, you aren’t following some
mechanical formula. You have a complex and open-ended process:
activating your understanding of this model person, and imagining how
they’d act in some new situation.

## Página 105

Principles and models both require careful judgment to apply. Whether
such a rule applies to this particular case will always be open to
interpretation and up for debate.
The third kind of rule is completely different. This is a rule as an
algorithm , an explicit directive meant to be applied mechanically—without
discretion or judgment, exactly as it is written, with no exceptions. And it is
this algorithmic conception of a rule that has become dominant in the past
century, says Daston. It is so dominant, in fact, that people can have a hard
time wrapping their heads around these older conceptions of rules—to see
what they’re for and why we might ever prefer the fuzzier, more open-
ended principles and models to the more precise, complete algorithms.
The algorithmic rule, says Daston, is a relatively modern invention. You
might think algorithmic rules arose with the rise of computing machines.
But they actually showed up about a hundred years earlier, she says, in a
move to cheapen labor. Older mathematical methods often involved
principles—that is, mathematical rules that had to be applied with care and
discretion. For a given problem, you would have your choice of different
mathematical tools and methods, each of which would yield a different
result. You’d have to use your judgment to know which method was best for
a particular problem, and how exactly to apply it.
A simplified example: There are many different methods to split a slice
of pie in two. You can do it by weight. You can divide it according to an
exact angle, which you have measured with a protractor. Or you can use the
“I cut, you choose” method. Each yields a slightly different result, and
different situations call for different methods. If the goal is to create two
perfect-looking slices of pie for an advertising photo shoot, maybe you
want a protractor. If you are a chemist trying to figure out the exact caloric
count of a serving of pie, you should use weight. If the goal is to let two
feuding siblings split a piece of pie without either of them feeling like they
got screwed—then use the “I cut, you choose” method.
For complicated problems, choosing the right method took a considerable
amount of expertise, so you had to hire people with lots of mathematical
training and experience in the right field. Such trained mathematicians were
rare and expensive. So corporations and governments spent a lot of
resources creating an alternative to expensive, experienced experts: rule sets
that anybody could mechanically follow.

## Página 106

This, says Daston, is an algorithmic rule: a procedure that anybody can
follow.
Early examples of algorithmic rules include logarithm tables and various
tables for performing navigational calculations. Such tables could be used
by virtually anybody, and their work could be checked by virtually anybody
else. There was no choice about which method to use: You just took some
numbers and plugged them into the charts. So now you could hire cheaper
workers—basically unskilled labor—to do the same job. And anybody
could audit a worker’s performance; you didn’t need to pay another
specialized expert to check over your first specialized expert’s work.
To be an algorithm here doesn’t mean that something is executed on a
machine rather than by a human. To be an algorithm is to be a rule that has
been written to be used without significant skill, judgment, or discretion . In
fact, says Daston, the term calculator didn’t originally mean a machine for
doing math, but referred to teams of relatively unskilled laborers applying
these algorithmic tables and charts. Mechanical is a state of mind.
Daston has given us an extremely clear account of what it means to be
mechanical. A rule is mechanical precisely because anybody can apply it in
the same way. Mechanical rules are accessible; they enable consistency
across different people. They eliminate the uneven unpredictability of rules
that require discretion, judgment, and interpretation.
So why transform our procedures from principles to algorithms? Why
mechanize things? Because, says Daston, mechanical procedures are
cheaper and more accessible. They are faster to learn and easier to use, by a
broader range of people. But there is, once again, a massive trade-off.
According to Daston, algorithmic rules work well when the context in
which they’re applied is similar to the context in which they were
formulated. But they work badly once the context changes. They can’t
adapt to new details. Algorithmic rules are highly efficient in stable
environments, but bad in dynamic environments.
This all might seem pretty abstract. So let’s turn to thinking about a very
familiar and concrete case of mechanical rules: recipes.
MY MOTHER WAS AN EXCELLENT COOK. SHE LEARNED TO COOK not from
cookbooks and recipes, but from her family and friends in Vietnam. Like a
lot of people from her generation, she cooked relatively few dishes, but she

## Página 107

cooked them extraordinarily well. This is completely unlike lots of younger
people, like me, who often cook something different every night, following
some recipe we found in a cookbook or by googling.
I learned to cook a couple of years after I’d graduated from college. My
mother never tried to teach me. She expressed a lot of regret over this later.
She admitted that it hadn’t even occurred to her to try to teach a boy to
cook.
I taught myself to cook after college through recipes, using a few key
classic cookbooks: Julia Child’s French cookbooks and Marcella Hazan’s
Italian cookbooks. And I got great results. So on one visit home, I asked my
mom to teach me my very favorite Vietnamese dish: hot and sour catfish
soup. So she did—or she tried to. What she gave me wasn’t anything I
could follow; it was nothing like a recipe at all. It seemed to me, at the time,
like this vast and disorganized ramble, a weird organic messy flowchart of
possibilities and decisions and judgment calls. I was supposed to add
tomato and pineapple but I was supposed to taste the ingredients first. If one
was sweet and the other sour, I was probably fine. But if they were both
particularly sweet, I would need to balance them with some extra vinegar.
Or if they were both sour, I might need to add a little brown sugar. My mom
wouldn’t ever tell me how much; it all depended on how things were tasting
that day. And I had to smell the catfish—was it a particularly clean, farmed
variety, or was it one of those funky-smelling wild ones?
I was horrified by the mess of what she was giving me. And what I said
to her then, to my eternal shame, was: “Mom, what is this Third World
bullshit? Give me a real recipe!”
What I didn’t understand then was that my mom was giving me
something real—something profoundly real. But it was completely different
from the kinds of tidy recipes I was used to from my modern cookbooks. I
was used to recipes where I didn’t have to taste the food as I went, where I
didn’t have to make judgment calls—where I could just dump in the
required ingredients in the exact specified amounts. These precise, modern
recipes had, in a weird way, disrupted my sense of what cooking was and
could be. I had come to assume that cooking—real cooking—had to
proceed via an algorithm. I had refused to accept that real cooking might
involve a messy and organic decision space, full of a thousand decision
points and judgment calls.

## Página 108

Daston points out that there has been an enormous shift in the kinds of
recipes we find in cookbooks over time. Old-school cookbooks often gave
recipes that would look unrecognizably vague to the modern eye. A recipe
for egg bread might look like this:
Combine about ten handfuls of flour, four or five eggs, and a
handful of warm water with a bit of yeast. Knead vigorously,
adding more flour or water as needed, to maintain workable
dough. Knead until the dough has a pleasantly stretchy
texture. Bake in a medium-hot oven, adding some splashes of
water to the oven to keep the air modestly moist, until the
bread is golden brown and has a nice hollow ring when
knocked.
Compare that to a typical modern recipe for bread:
3 cups flour
4 eggs
⅔ cup warm water (110 degrees F)
2 (0.25 oz) packets instant yeast
1 tsp salt
Combine ingredients and knead until the dough can be
stretched to sufficient transparency to read through. Bake at
350 degrees for 45 minutes. Let rest 10 minutes before
slicing.
The old-school recipe is made up of principles, and the new-school
recipe is made up of algorithms. The old-school recipe requires a bunch of
judgment calls to apply, and those calls involve having a fair bit of
experience with bread—with having a sense of how dough feels when
kneaded appropriately, and how one might adjust to find that feeling by
adding more flour and sugar. The new-school recipe mostly removes
judgment calls, substituting various algorithmic rules that can be executed
by almost anybody.
The advantages of the new-school, algorithmic recipe are obvious. First
and foremost, it is highly accessible. Anybody, so long as they have access
to the requisite measuring equipment, can execute the recipe, and the

## Página 109

variation between different recipe users will be relatively low. I am not a
particularly good baker, but I have used modern, algorithmic recipes to
produce delicious bread on the first try.
Let me be clear here: I learned to cook from algorithmic recipes, and I
never would have been able to get a start with cooking Japanese, Mexican,
or Russian food without them. The old-school recipe might be a useful
guide for an experienced baker. But for a total novice, it is miserably cryptic
—full of tough decisions and subtle sensory cues. Algorithmic recipes are a
useful means of finding your way into a new cuisine. They are a great
starting point—but hopefully, you eventually move past them.
Algorithmic recipes are also great if you’re a massive fast-food franchise
and want to use low-skill, replaceable employees to produce food that tastes
the same in every location. But in this case, algorithmic recipes aren’t just
the starting point. These fast-food companies want the food to taste the
same no matter who’s making it, so they demand workers stick to the
algorithmic recipe. And to make this work, industrial-scale food companies
also need to standardize the inputs. They need to make sure that the buns
and the burger patties and the cheese they’re shipping to each of their
franchises are exactly the same. Standardized inputs plus algorithmic
procedures equals consistent results, without any need for expert workers.
The relative disadvantages of the algorithmic recipe are rather subtler, but
they are very real. The algorithmic recipe is profoundly nonadaptable if you
follow it as written. And if you diverge from it, then you’ve lost much of
the advantages of algorithms. Your divergence requires you to use your
judgment, to lean on your experience. So what are the downsides of
following an algorithmic recipe precisely, exactly as it’s written? What is
the cost of engineered accessibility?
Back in an earlier era of my life, when I was a food writer, I interviewed
an incredible pizza chef in L.A. He ran a wild-yeast sourdough Neapolitan
pizza shop called Mother Dough that made some of the most glorious,
absurdly radiant pizzas I have ever had in my life. He wasn’t from Naples;
he was Lebanese. He told me that one day, eating a perfect Neapolitan
pizza, he’d had a mystical insight about the unity of all the flatbread
traditions, about the beautiful spectrum that encompassed both Lebanese
flatbreads and Neapolitan pizza. So he moved to Naples and apprenticed
himself to a pizza master for a decade, and then moved to L.A. and opened
up his shop.

## Página 110

I asked him how he made pizza so good—God-pizza, pizza that sang
with the most delicate balance of crispy to chewy, that gave me the most
angelic hit of pure beauty, while smacking me with pure animal gut-joy. He
pointed out the enormous wood-fired copper pizza oven at the back of the
shop. “See that?” he said. “That’s the temperature gauge. I painted it over,
with black paint, so I couldn’t look at it. It’s a distraction. You have to put
your hand here”—he placed his hand directly at the open mouth of the pizza
oven—“and feel how it’s breathing. It will tell you how the pizza wants to
be cooked that day. You can’t trust the temperature gauge to tell you the
truth.”
What he meant was that temperature wasn’t all that mattered, but if you
had the temperature gauge, you would be tempted to hyper-focus on it to
the exclusion of all else. Baking is a complex act, where a live product—
yeast and dough—reacts to a complex set of ever-changing environmental
qualities. Temperature matters, but also humidity, air flow, air pressure. And
all that atmospheric stuff is changing, every day. There is no single correct
baking time and temperature. What you need to do changes each day, in
response to those changing variables. And this pizza chef had learned to
perform, by feel, a complex synthesis of all these factors. He had painted
over his temperature gauge because it was a distraction. It tempted you to
focus completely on one thing, to treat the single measurement it tracked—
temperature—as the all-important one, instead of looking at the complex
interaction of all the relevant qualities.
His shop was also incredibly consistent. It produced amazing wood-fired
pizzas, and he nailed that exact texture of dough every single day. Other
shops—those where people were following an algorithm, baking a pizza
with an exact amount of time and temperature each day—were actually far
more inconsistent in their results . They had crispy pizza dough one day and
rubbery dough the next, even though their procedure was more consistent.
Why? Because the rigidity of the algorithm, when followed mechanically,
prevents the cooks from adapting to continually changing conditions. Air
pressure changes, humidity changes, yeast changes, but the algorithm
remains the same. The true master cook adapts their procedures to changing
inputs.
And the demand for mechanicity pushes us toward avoiding the use of
our trained sensitivities. Let’s go back to the old-school bread recipe, where
you’re supposed to bake the bread until it rings in a certain way when

## Página 111

knocked. Here, the recipe is asking you to look for a specific quality that is
deeply tied to what really matters. The sound is an indicator of internal loft.
In the new-school recipe, we’ve removed the sensory judgment and
substituted a simple measurement of time. “Bake at 350 degrees for 45
minutes” is a mechanical rule. It is an explicit directive that refers to clear
demarcations that anybody can find, with access to the standard tools.
But time isn’t always a reliable indicator of doneness in bread. A lot
depends on the temperature of the dough when it goes in the oven, on the
ambient humidity, on all that stuff. The sound of the bread is actually a
more reliable indicator of doneness, but it requires experience and trained
sensory capacity to exercise. In the new-school recipe, we’ve substituted a
mechanical standard—one that anybody can apply if they have access to the
basic tools. The new-school recipe isn’t actually more reliable. The old-
school recipe sounds, to modern ears, weirdly primitive—but it’s more
accurate where it counts. It exercises your skill and trained sensitivity to
track the most important quality, which is internal loft. But this old-school,
principle-based recipe isn’t usable by everybody.
The new-school recipe trades accuracy for accessibility . And it does so
because real accuracy, in real-world situations, with a complex changing
environment, requires flexibility and adaptation. When we substitute a
simple mechanical rule, we’re removing the demand for skilled adaptability.
And, weirdly enough, what makes the modern recipe feel modern is
precisely the fact that it excludes the use of trained judgment and developed
sensitivity. It feels modern because it’s mechanical. For people like me,
raised on modern cookbooks, these recipes feel more real, because they’ve
been written to be usable without skill .
You can make algorithmic recipes work better, though, by decreasing the
variety of the world. My mom gave me complex directions in which I had
to taste the tomatoes and the pineapple and then adjust everything in
response, because these are particularly variable ingredients. Some days
tomatoes and pineapples are more sweet, and other days they’re more sour,
and you have to compensate. One way out of the need for adaptation is to
standardize your tomatoes and pineapples. Many of my Italian cookbooks
call for a specific variety of canned tomatoes: San Marzanos, which are all
grown in one region of Italy, in very similar volcanic soil. This is a very
stable ingredient; every can tastes pretty much the same, year after year. If
all the ingredients have been fixed to be the same, then we can, indeed, just

## Página 112

follow an algorithmic recipe. Like Daston says, algorithms work well when
the world doesn’t change. But the sense that such recipes are perfectly
reliable is partially an illusion. It depends on the vast amount of work spent
making the world of ingredients consistent. But that reliability vanishes
once you leave that space of artificial stability.
When I started shopping at farmers markets and buying these incredibly
flavorful but highly variable heirloom tomatoes from different stands, I had
a moment of pure confusion. The tomatoes I was tasting raw were
incredible—these dense, explosively flavorful things—but when I started
cooking with them, my recipes stopped working. It took me a while to
realize why. I went from using highly invariant canned tomatoes to buying
delicious but ever-changing fresh tomatoes. I’d left the world of carefully
constructed standardization. But I was still cooking algorithmically,
dumping in the exact amounts called for, without tasting or adjusting to my
constantly variable tomatoes. So I had to learn to do exactly what I’d
rejected in my mom’s messy flowchart. I had to taste, I had to decide, and I
had to make on-the-fly judgments based on my experience. I had to adapt.
A RECIPE IS A SIMPLE EXAMPLE OF A MECHANICAL PROCEDURE. A procedure is
mechanical if it’s consistently applicable, by different people, without the
need for judgment. (Daston uses the words algorithmic and mechanical
somewhat interchangeably, but I’m going to simplify the language from this
point and just talk about mechanical rules.) And that consistency is often
quite narrow. A mechanical recipe leads to consistency in procedure, but not
necessarily in the final results.
By implementing mechanical procedures, we can rid ourselves of the
need for skill or sensitivity, to varying degrees. Your typical recipe is built
to be followed by anybody who can read and has access to some basic cup
measures. There are also mechanical procedures for experts, like a standard
procedure for running a test for chem lab techs. These are written assuming
a greater level of background knowledge, but once you have that
background knowledge, it’ll be executed in the same way, by all users—
without the need for judgment.
Here is the trade-off between fuzzy principles and mechanical
procedures. Fuzzy principles, like those old-school recipes, require the
trained judgment of a highly experienced person to apply, which means

## Página 113

they can use all the experience, sensitivity, and attunement of that judge.
They can use complex cues for action, like “Bake until it makes a hollow
ringing sound,” or “Add pineapple until it tastes balanced.” That linguistic
fuzziness opens a space for expertise and sensitivity. Fuzzy language is a
cue for the person executing the rule to exercise their own judgment. But
that procedure won’t be as easy to execute by the public at large, nor can
the public as easily inspect and oversee other people’s applications of the
procedure. And different experts might end up doing different things
following that procedure.
A mechanical procedure, on the other hand, is highly repeatable and
accessible. Mechanical procedures work best with the kinds of things that
are naturally public and observable by everybody. This is when we truly get
to harness the power of scale, and reap the rewards of massive collections
of data. But other times, the situation may be subtler—something that
requires discernment, sensitivity, and expertise to notice. And in those
cases, mechanical procedures are far less accurate. They will miss the mark
in subtle terrain, because they’re bound by the demand that the steps be
clear and explicit enough that they may be consistently applied by anybody.
Mechanical evaluation systems have a power. They grant us portability,
and freedom from a certain kind of corruption and bias. They create easy
convergence. But they also introduce a new kind of bias: a bias toward
paying attention to the kinds of things that we can count mechanically , and
especially toward what’s easy to count mechanically.
WE HAVE NOW MET THE SECOND HORSEMAN OF BUREAUCRACY. His name is
Rules (full name: Mechanical Rules). He gives us clear procedures that
everybody can follow in the same way. By giving us this tool, Rules offers
us an enormous power. Rules will make policies consistent and easy-to-
follow for everybody. He offers accessibility and consistency , which are the
bedrock for coordinating across vast scale. This is why Rules and Scale ride
together. Rules makes the way easy for Scale. Scale wants to cross contexts,
to have processes that work universally. Rules can give us that by making
mechanical procedures that are designed for everybody to follow
consistently. And at their best, Rules and Scale give us the power of data:
vast collections of information that have been collected in a consistent

## Página 114

manner, because the rules have been written so that everybody can collect
them in the same way.
But Rules also charges a heavy price. Rules confines us to operating in
the terrain where everybody can repeat a procedure consistently. When the
terrain is more obvious, that’s fine. But when it’s more subtle, Rules will
want to change what we target and count, to something that everyone can
repeat with the same result. And in order to serve Scale—in order to get us
working precisely together, in the same system, emitting the same results—
we need to follow Rules without deviation. We need to be locked in. We
can’t make exceptions based on our judgment, or shift around how we
apply the rule, or we lose out on much of that power. We can’t use our
discretion to adapt to changing circumstances.
Rules offers us the power of accessibility . What he asks us to sacrifice is
adaptability .

## Página 115