# 13. The Secret Heart of Mechanization

## CHAPTER 13

The Secret Heart of Mechanization
hy do we want mechanized values in our real-world systems?
What purpose does mechanization serve in our institutions and
W our public life?
You might think a major benefit of mechanized evaluation is objectivity.
And it’s true, mechanical procedures are very good at getting us certain
kinds of objectivity. But we have to be careful here, because objectivity is a
very loaded term. It’s easy to slip into this simple divide, in which humans
exercising intuition and judgment is “subjective” and therefore bad, and
following a mechanical procedure for judgment is “objective” and therefore
good.
But objectivity is much more complicated than that. There are lots of
different kinds of objectivity, and those different kinds often run at cross
purposes. Sometimes, by “objectivity,” we mean that something is bias-free.
But as we’ve seen, mechanical procedures can be deeply biased toward
what’s mechanically countable. Sometimes, objectivity means a process is
accurate. But mechanical values often fail to capture what we originally
cared about.
What explicit bureaucratic procedures are good at, says Theodore Porter,
is achieving a very specific thing, which he calls “mechanical objectivity.”
This means they can be repeated by anybody to get to the same result .
There is a similar concept in law, says Porter, called “legal objectivity.” A
legally objective procedure is one that will yield the same result for a given
case no matter who applies it. And in the legal context, we are often willing
to give up a significant degree of accuracy in order to achieve legal
1
objectivity.
Consider what it is to be an adult. Adulthood involves lots of complex
features—emotional maturity, intellectual maturity, and all that. And a lot of

## Página 124

the rights we want to grant—the right to vote, the right to decide to drink
alcohol—should be pegged to that important but complicated thing called
maturity. But maturity is difficult to assess, and different people will come
to different conclusions. So we use a clear line: age in years. In the United
States, you get to vote when you turn eighteen. Age is just an approximation
of maturity. “Eighteen years old” is not a perfect tracker of maturity, but it’s
a simple and highly accessible substitute.
And this case makes clear why we often want legal objectivity over
accuracy. It would be absolutely unworkable to park individual judges at
voting booths and let them each make their own assessment about who’s
mature enough to vote. There is so much danger for biased judgments and
corruption here, so we draw a clear, mechanical line. There is no question
about whether somebody is over eighteen, and everybody should apply that
rule in the same way. Mechanical rules are worth it in this particular case.
But mechanical objectivity isn’t always what we want. The philosopher
of law Timothy Endicott puts it this way: Laws with vague language—like
“the right to vote is granted to people with intellectual maturity”—will be
applied by different people in different ways. When we have laws like that,
we expose ourselves to one kind of arbitrariness: that of the individual
judge. Different people will judge intellectual maturity in different ways, so
whether you get to vote depends heavily on the luck of the draw—on who’s
judging your intellectual maturity. So we often replace those vague laws
with laws with precise language, like “the right to vote is granted to people
over the age of eighteen.” We eliminate the arbitrariness of individual
judges. But, says Endicott, precise language introduces a new kind of
arbitrariness: that of sharp lines drawn through a world that is naturally full
2
of gradual spectrums and shades of gray. The choice between vague and
precise legal language is a choice between two different sorts of
arbitrariness.
We can’t eliminate arbitrariness; we can only choose between different
kinds. So, says Endicott, we should choose our trade-offs with care.
Mechanical rules gain consistent repeatability but often trade away deep
accuracy. And we will want to trade differently in different contexts. In the
legal voting age case, there’s not a huge difference between 17 years and 11
months old and 18 years old. But it’s worth it to introduce the arbitrariness
of sharp lines in order to remove the possibility of biased judgment at the
voting booth. Here, mechanical objectivity gives us a huge benefit. But

## Página 125

other times we may want a different trade-off. Is my kid old enough to
watch Tremors , a goofy faux-B-movie horror flick about burrowing mega-
worms that eat people? It’s PG-13, and my kid is eight, with a love for
creepy anime and Minecraft faux-horror videos. I could just follow the rule
and not let him watch it until he’s thirteen—or I could use my discretion.
And there’s not much upside to sticking dogmatically to a precise rule here.
I have a lot of detailed information about this particular movie and this
particular kid. Mechanical objectivity has little advantage here. Sticking to
it would force us to give up the relevant information about the specific
situation that we, in fact, have access to.
My worry is that we are starting to automatically reach for the
mechanical rule, abdicating discretionary judgment even when the context
calls for it. And this is what we are doing when we let ourselves be value-
captured by a mechanical value. We are accepting into our hearts a
procedure for evaluating ourselves and the world around us that meets the
highest standard of accessibility, at the cost of adaptability and sensitivity.
We are choosing consistency of procedure over sensitivity to the particulars.

## WHY DO WE WANT MECHANICITY SO MUCH, THOUGH?

Let’s first get clearer on what mechanicity is, exactly. Recall Lorraine
Daston’s notion of a mechanical rule as one that can be used by anybody,
without a significant amount of skill. This notion is quite binary: Something
is mechanical if it is usable by absolutely anybody, with no skill at all.
But there’s a bit more of a complicated spectrum than that. My spouse is
a research chemist; she designs new kinds of chemical tests, and once she’s
finished prototyping, she writes a standard operating procedure (SOP) for
lab techs to execute. The SOP is written so that any lab tech can follow it
precisely, with the same result. But that’s not everybody. The SOP is written
specifically so that anybody with a bachelor’s degree in chemistry—and a
few days of extra internal training—can follow it consistently. The SOP is a
set of mechanical rules, but it’s not one that absolutely anybody can use. It’s
a mechanical rule set that’s been tuned to a particular group. But if you’re in
the group and have the requisite technical training, the rules are written so
that you can follow them automatically—without judgment or discretion.
So let me offer the following definition of a mechanical rule , which is
relativized to a particular group.

## Página 126

A mechanical rule is one that can be followed consistently by any
member of a specified group.
The size of the specified group varies. Some mechanical rules are
designed to be usable by anybody with a fifth-grade-equivalent reading
ability. Some demand a more specific technical background, like having a
bachelor’s degree in chemistry. But a mechanical rule designed for a group
could not demand any further special sensitivity or nuance beyond the
membership conditions of that group. We must omit any rules that require
more specialized understanding to use.
For example, the demands of mechanicity changed how we measure
land. In older societies, people often used highly flexible, functional
measures of land. In the Domesday Book of 1086, English surveyors
measured land using the hide . A hide is the amount of land required to
sustain an average family.
Notice that a hide doesn’t equate to a fixed volume of land. It’s a measure
not of size, but of fertility and richness. A hide by a river full of fish would
be pretty small. A hide in a forest might be larger; one in a grassland even
larger; and a hide in a desert would be massive. And notice that the hide
isn’t even equivalent to some average crop yield. What matters for a hide is
the ability to support a family. So if some chunk of land is incredibly fertile
most of the time—but every five years it crashes and yields far less than
you’d need to survive—it’s not a hide.
A hide is a highly functional measure. It tracks a deeply useful piece of
information, something that directly matters for human lives. Think about
the difference between a king saying, “Give every soldier five acres of
land,” and “Give every soldier a hide of land.” A hide tracks the resources
that actually matter to people’s real lives.
But hides require a lot of local ecological knowledge to use. So units like
the hide tend to disappear as we move away from localized governance
toward centralized bureaucracies. In England, the concept of the hide left
3
common usage in the late twelfth century. A centralized bureaucratic
government typically wants to use a set of trained land surveyors that can
move around the country. This means their methods cannot depend on deep
local knowledge of a particular ecosystem. They will want methods that any
trained land surveyor will be able to deploy anywhere. So we shifted away
from the hide and toward acres and square kilometers. We are making a

## Página 127

trade. We are giving up on tracking things that really matter, in exchange
for the more accessible technique of drawing straight lines.
WHAT, THEN, DO WE GET OUT OF MECHANIZATION? WHAT DO WE get when we
take up Rules on his offer and strictly conform our judgments to mechanical
rules? Some of the answers are quite familiar: consistency, accountability,
transferability. But underneath those answers, there is a shared foundation.
Mechanization makes the world more fungible .
To be fungible is to be perfectly replaceable. With fungible objects, there
is no value attached to a particular thing. Different instances of the same
category will all have the same value.
White sugar and gasoline are highly fungible items. If I borrow a cup of
sugar from my neighbor and later give them back a cup of sugar, it doesn’t
have to be the very same cup of sugar. I don’t have to give back exactly the
same granules. The value of any cup of refined sugar is pretty much the
same as any other.
The most perfectly fungible thing in the world is money. If I borrow
twenty dollars from you, I don’t have to give back the very same bill. In
fact, you can give me a physical twenty-dollar bill, and I can repay you in
electronic currency. It doesn’t matter.
The least fungible things in the world are our particular human
relationships and the physical stuff that relates to them. If you break my
precious heirloom—say, the watch my grandfather gave me—you can’t just
replace it with a different watch, no harm done. And if you steal my spouse,
you can’t just replace them with a new one.
Much of the efficiency of our world comes from engineered fungibility.
Different cups of refined white sugar have the same value to me because
they all function exactly the same in my recipes. And that’s not just a lucky
accident. People—scientists, engineers, corporations—have done serious
work to make sugar fungible.
If you’ve tried unrefined brown sugar from a lot of different places,
you’ll find there’s an enormous variety of tastes and textures. (Try it. Have
a brown sugar tasting party.) Some brown sugar tastes intensely vegetal,
like grass, with this high crisp, clean note. Other brown sugar is all low
notes and infinitely warm richness. I’ve had raw palm sugars that taste like
coconuts and apples, and others that have a wild, electric, raw, flowery, high

## Página 128

aroma. Some of these sugars are moist and clumpy, others dry and granular,
and others come in hard blocks. Unrefined brown sugars are far less
fungible. They have peculiar, specific qualities that you have to work with
—and you can’t easily replace one kind with another. They can also be
quite annoying to use if you’ve spent your life surrounded by fungible
refined white sugar. With refined white sugar, we’ve worked to remove
these various differences and create a universal, interchangeable project. We
have created fungibility.
Fungibility often rests on an entire invisible social apparatus, a vast effort
of coordination. If I have a quarter-inch nut, I can buy pretty much any
quarter-inch bolt and it’ll work. But this is constructed magic. It happens
because people have put in untold hours making sure every factory that
makes quarter-inch bolts manufactures them to a specific set of tolerances.
And once they’ve done all that background work, it makes other parts of
life incredibly easy. But because it is easy everywhere, it tends to recede
from our awareness. We forget that the magic of nuts and bolts that fit is the
result of a careful and constant effort to keep things in line.
When we create procedures with mechanical rules, we make workers
fungible . We no longer need to depend on a particular person with a
particular long-developed sensitivity. We no longer need to spend years
having an expert gradually train their apprentice to be able to do the job. We
no longer need to court some small set of specialists. We can look for an
easy signal, like having a high school diploma, or a bachelor’s degree in the
relevant field, and swap out one worker for another with high confidence
that they’ll do the job the same way, that their outputs will still fit perfectly
into the next worker’s inputs.
And I mean workers at every level. A mechanical procedure for cooking
enables fast-food franchises to swap out entry-level line cooks. But a
mechanical metric for corporate success allows us to make CEOs, VPs, and
highly paid management consultants into fungible components in an
evaluation machine. And making workers fungible isn’t just about firing
and replacing them. It also means that people from different backgrounds
can collect data in precisely the same way. Fungibility is also what enables
large-scale data collection. It doesn’t matter if you’re Korean or Kenyan,
raised by corporate type-A go-getters or homeschooled by hippies—you can
all count page views and profits the same way.

## Página 129

Worker fungibility also rests on top of a vast, carefully constructed,
coordinated social effort. To make sugar fungible, refine it. To make
workers fungible, mechanize their procedures. But this, too, is easy to
forget about, because mechanization makes things automatic, and automatic
things tend to recede into the background.
I met a lady once in a supermarket. She was staring down a shelf full of
salsas. There was a tasting table with some samples, and she was chewing
her way through them all with resentful ferocity. She turned to me and
demanded, “What’s all this? What’s this salsa verde and New Mexico salsa
and all these different kinds? How come these two red salsas taste
completely different? And these two are supposed to be medium hot but
they’re totally different? What the hell? Why do they have to make it so
complicated?”
There is an underlying worldview implied by her salsa rage. She has
assumed that left to its own devices, the world would be regular. Naturally,
different people and different companies would have used the same terms to
mean the same things. So all the chaos and disorder she was confronting on
the salsa-tasting table must have been the result of an intentional conspiracy
to disrupt this natural order (presumably one designed to confuse the
consumer and make them waste their money).
But in reality, it’s the other way around. Left to their own devices,
different actors and institutions will naturally tend to use different terms and
come up with different procedures. It takes a vast, intentional effort of
coordination to bring them into stable order. The reason so many of us
expect the world to be simple, stable, and standard is that we have grown up
in a world that was carefully made to be that way. We have lived our whole
lives in the shadow of a vast conspiracy of order.
WE HAVE NOW MET THE THIRD HORSEMAN OF BUREAUCRACY: Parts. The
Horseman of Parts wants pieces that are interchangeable, replaceable. (His
full name is Replaceable Parts.) Parts wants to be able to fix the machine. If
we lose a screw, Parts wants to be able to buy a new, identical screw. And if
we fire a worker, Parts wants to be able to replace them with a new,
identical worker. Of course, workers aren’t actually identical—each one is a
real human being, with their own thoughts and values. But we can make

## Página 130

them functionally identical, by giving them roles, rules, and procedures.
This is why Parts loves Rules. Rules turn people into parts.
This is what Parts asks us to do: Change the world to make workers
fungible. To do so, we have created procedures that anybody can execute.
When we mechanize evaluation, we set targets that anybody can count.
These new values are accessible, auditable, and utterly comprehensible to
all. And when we mechanize our values and targets, we make the job of
evaluation fungible. We can swap out one evaluator for another, and they’ll
still target the same thing and judge success in the same way. We won’t
need to trust the opaque sensitivities that come from long, nontransferable
experience.
You take unruly brown sugar and refine it, removing all the weird
differences. The result is the far more fungible white sugar, which functions
the same way in different recipes. By suctioning out the variety, you have
made standardized procedures work better. In the same way, you can take
people and refine them by getting rid of their variable loves and getting
them all to care about the same metric. And now they will all function the
same way in your institutional machine.
But there is a cost. In order to achieve fungibility, these mechanical
measures need to avoid invoking any expert sensitivity or deep and
particular experience. The demand for large-scale repeatability gives us the
power of vast scale and collective cooperation, at the price of using the
specific skills and sensitivities of someone specialized in this particular job,
in this particular place.
Parts promises us interchangeability . The sacrifice is specificity . And
when we apply Parts to people, we pay a special version of that price: we
give up individual sensitivity .

## Página 131