# 21. Technologies of Work, Technologies of Play

## CHAPTER 21

Technologies of Work, Technologies of Play
he ecosystem of games encourages us to take on a very different
attitude, a light and fluid one. Let’s call it the playful attitude .
T People have used the word play in so many different ways, but
there are some common threads. The philosopher María Lugones puts it this
way: To be playful is to be willing to enter into rule sets, but to hold them
1
lightly. Playfulness, says Lugones, is the capacity to travel between
worlds. By “worlds” here, she means different social worlds: the world of
Silicon Valley investors, the world of a poet, the world of professional
basketball, the family world. Each of these worlds has its own prepackaged
expectations, rules, values, and roles. To be in the Silicon Valley investing
world is to care deeply about disrupting the economy for profit. To be in the
poetry world is to care about creativity and self-expression. To be in the
family world is to care about nurturing and supporting your family. For
Lugones, to be playful is to be able to slip between these worlds, to easily
adopt different implicit rule sets about how to behave and what’s supposed
to be important. And it’s not just going through the motions. To be deeply
playful is to be able to flex your soul a little and actually occupy those
worlds from the inside—to get yourself to care a little bit.
Playfulness is one of many different attitudes you can have toward rule
sets. It will help to look at some others. For one thing, a person could be a
rules dogmatist. They are stuck in one particular rule set. The rules
dogmatist, as Lugones puts it, holds the rules of their world sacred. They
never question them or try on a different point of view. This is the
businessperson who can’t do anything but seek profit—who can’t see the
value in anything unless it will earn them money. It is the classical music
lover who can’t flex their sense of how music is supposed to be enough to

## Página 182

see the value of rap or hyperpop. The rules dogmatist doesn’t explore,
because they believe too deeply in their one true world.
Alternatively, a person could be a rules skeptic . They aren’t willing to
enter into any new worlds. They aren’t dogmatists, because they might not
be especially attached to any particular social world. They don’t hold any
rules sacred. But they’re stodgy in a different way. They’re unwilling to try
something new. The skeptic refuses to try on any new rules or goals, even
for a little while. You may recognize the rules skeptic in everyday gaming
contexts: They won’t submerge themselves in a new game. They aren’t
willing to try out caring for something new.
This skeptical attitude shows up outside games, too. The rules skeptic
won’t try new hobbies or arts. Crocheting seems dumb to them because you
could buy clothes for less money. Home gardening seems like a muddy
waste of time for just a few veggies. Hip-hop seems stupid because it’s just
sampling other people’s music and talking, for god’s sake, instead of
singing. They are particularly skeptical about the weird goals embedded in
new hobbies. Why start caring about making your own clothes, growing
your own vegetables, climbing rocks? They don’t see the point from the
outside, so they’re unwilling to take that leap of faith and try seeing it from
the inside.
A lot of the time, you can only see the real value in an activity by actually
doing it for a while—and you can only really do it if you get yourself to
care about it, just a little. I could never have imagined that after yo-yoing
for a while, I would come to cherish particular tricks for their eloquent
construction—for having a lovely resonance between how the yo-yo
moved, how my hands flowed, and how the string formations weaved and
transformed. But I never would have found that without first caring about
getting some basic tricks right, to build enough skill and awareness to start
feeling that flow.
The rules skeptic will never try out something new long enough to
discover its subtle value. They are also stuck, but in a very different way.
They don’t explore because they refuse to try out any new worlds.
In between the rules dogmatist and the rules skeptic is the playful person.
To be playful with the rules is to try them on, but lightly—to slip in and out
of worlds. A playful person is willing to try on different rules for a while
and see how it goes. But they’re not stuck there. A playful person is
exploratory . And part of that is trying on new goals and values. The playful

## Página 183

person, as Lugones puts it, occupies a world creatively . They are willing to
rewrite the rules if they need to.
ONE OF THE EFFECTS OF THIS CENTRALIZED DECISION-MAKING, says Scott, is that
it changes the location of skill and autonomous decision-making. In old-
school farming, people mostly used polycropping, which involved tailoring
complex interacting sets of plants to suit the environment. This requires an
intensive amount of detailed local knowledge of the microclimate.
Polycropping is a technology that supports a highly specialized farmer.
Under polycropping, each farmer was a valuable, difficult-to-replace expert
in a specific ecosystem.
States, says Scott, hate polycropping. Every farmer is making different
decisions for different reasons; they are all highly autonomous. That
variability is illegible to the state. States prefer monocropping.
Monocropping doesn’t just mean we plant each field with one crop but that
we change all the fields to be as much alike as possible . The basic logic of
monocropping, says Scott, is to change the physical world to make
centralized control easier and more effective. A small number of agriculture
scientists test out what works well in a few research greenhouses. They
come up with genetically optimized plants and carefully researched
procedures—but those procedures work best when deployed in soil that is
as close to the research greenhouses as possible. So in monocropping, we
change all the different ecosystems to match those research greenhouses.
We apply fertilizer and pesticide until all the different soils are as similar as
possible, so we can farm them all the same way. Instead of adapting to a
variable world, we standardize it.
Under monocropping, says Scott, skill and decision-making get
concentrated in the center—in the hands of a small number of agricultural
scientists and managers, who spend a lot of creative effort to make
relatively easy-to-follow rules and procedures, which everybody else in the
system then has to follow mechanically.
And here is the awful core of the whole thing, the insight of Scott’s that
perpetually haunts me. Once the state has created these centralized, easy-to-
follow rules, they have eliminated the need for highly skilled local
specialists. The state can now employ almost anybody to follow these rules.

## Página 184

Monocropping de-skills workers. It takes a highly autonomous, highly
skilled farmer and replaces them with a more mechanical rule-follower. And
this makes states less dependent on particular farmers. Now it can hire and
fire and replace at will.
Value capture is monocropping for the soul.
Institutional metrics support coordinated action. They are highly
accessible, which makes it possible for huge swarms of different people to
tightly coordinate around a single clear goal. But to achieve that, the shared
goals cannot be formulated in a way that varies sharply from one terrain to
another. They cannot be tailored to particular people or particular small
communities. The goals cannot be formulated in a way that depends on
specific sensitivity and expertise.
And because they are so pervasive, metrics invite value capture rather
than free play and reflective control. They invite the unreflective acceptance
of prespecified values, as set by some external, central authority. Metrics
make it easy to stop engaging in the practice of fine-tuning our values, to
lose touch with the feedback of our sensations. They put us out of practice
with adapting our goals and our activities to suit us. They are a technology
that centralizes decision-making about targets and values—and so
encourages us to outsource our values to that central authority.
Metrics are a technology that centralizes the process of meaning-making.
So metrics de-skill us for the process of setting our own sense of meaning.
BEING PLAYFUL WITH GAMES ENABLES TWO THINGS. FIRST, YOU get the goods of
exploring new value worlds. You get to know what different scoring
systems are like from the inside—what it’s like to live under a radically
different value. But it also encourages exiting value worlds. Playfulness
builds the habit of regularly distancing yourself from the scoring system.
And the essential nature of games encourages us to take up that playful
attitude. Games are accessible . They have mechanical rules and scoring
systems, which makes them easy to step into. They are tightly bounded .
They end. Their boundaries are a signal to us, a reminder to step back from
our psychological immersion in the scoring system. Games are isolated .
The points in a game are usually disconnected from real stakes. This makes
it easier to treat those games as unimportant, so that we can flit between
different scoring systems.

## Página 185

Metrics are pervasive; they are baked into our ruling institutions and
deeply connected to external power structures—to promotions, power, and
status. Metrics discourage playfulness.
Most important, the mechanical scoring systems of games are
independent . They aren’t required to coordinate. They use mechanical rules
as a communication device to allow different people to write down different
values—but different games can have different rules. This freedom—this
decentralization of game authorship, this diversification of game purposes
—is what creates a varied ecosystem of explorable values. This is the heart
of the technology of games.
The technology of games uses rigidity to communicate new modes of
agency—lots of them—but doesn’t force us to stick with any particular
mode of agency for our entire lives. This allows us to explore a diverse
ecosystem of different, isolated games. The technology of games gives us
quick access to many radically different visions of the good.
Games are a technology that decentralizes the process of meaning-
making.
LET’S GO BACK TO THE FOUR HORSEMEN OF BUREAUCRACY: Rules, Scale, Parts,
and Control. They will help us give a tidier answer to the original question:
Why do games and metrics hit so different when they both involve
mechanical scoring systems?
Games and metrics accept the trade from the Horseman of Rules. Both
use mechanical rules; both use scoring systems with highly accessible
procedures. This makes it easy for anybody to enter into the scoring system.
Metrics enthusiastically accept the Horseman of Parts. They are all in on
the world in which workers and data collectors and judges can be easily
swapped with one another. If everybody in the software industry cares most
about products shipped, or everybody in the journalism industry cares only
about page view counts, then we can easily swap people inside that
industry. They don’t just act in the same way, they will care about the same
thing in their core. Precise value convergence makes workers fungible at the
deepest level.
Games, on the other hand, have a complicated and tense relationship with
Parts. There is a sense in which mechanical rules help players be sorta
fungible. After all, the whole point of mechanical scoring systems is that

## Página 186

anybody can pick up a game and learn its goals in a moment. So there is
one limited way in which games use the power of Parts: Most are written in
clear language, so anybody can enter the game and learn the rules.
But there is another sense in which games are deeply inimical to Parts:
We can’t swap one game for another, or one player for another, and still all
be equally satisfied. Our tastes are not fungible, and the distinctive beauty
of different games is not fungible. Our purposes for play have not been
made interchangeable in the world of games. Mechanical rules make the
entry point to a game accessible, but they do not make players, or games,
into interchangeable parts.
And metrics and games have entirely different relationships to Scale and
Control. Games will happily use the power of Rules, but bend them to a
diversity of purposes, to build wildly different games for different reasons
and different players. Games reject the need for meaning to be held stable
across different contexts. They reject the need for a central authority to
dictate which scoring system to use. The basic structure of games
encourages personalized modding: house rules, chess variations, speedrun
versions. Games tend to exclude Scale and Control from setting the central
purpose of play.
Metrics, on the other hand, are inextricably married to Scale and Control.
Metrics are a technology whose central function is to make evaluations and
judgments comprehensible at scale, to make data aggregate. This lets
authority figures compress the landscape into a legible form, make
decisions, and then push out those decisions to the rest of the world—and
justify them in ways that anybody can understand.
Metrics are mechanical scoring systems tuned to work at scale; they are
standardized and rigidified to serve the purpose of massive coordination.
Games use mechanical scoring systems for local purposes, under local
control.

## Página 187

## Part 5

## W H AT D O W E D O ?

## Página 188