# 8. The Limits of Data

## CHAPTER 8

The Limits of Data
coring systems shape action. In well-designed games, the scoring
systems have been tuned to produce interesting, satisfying, delightful
S action. Things are different in the world of metrics and institutional
measures. There, we find scoring systems that have been designed for very
different purposes—and that often drive us to miserable, grinding action.
Why? To understand that, we need to understand the forces that shape
institutional metrics. Transparency metrics were a gateway to a bigger
picture. They are a relatively simple case study, because their core function
—public oversight—is so singular and clear. This makes it easy to see their
price: how they undermine expertise. The costs of transparency metrics are
relatively easy to understand, because public transparency metrics are, in a
sense, stupid by design. Inexpertise is baked into their basic function.
Transparency metrics offer us a trade-off between trust and transparency.
When we zoom out and survey the larger class of public metrics and
measures, we will find a much more complicated set of trade-offs—because
metrics are playing many functions at once. What we need now is to
understand the general functions of metrics, and what the typical costs and
trade-offs are of using them.
A metric, in its modern form, usually has two key components:

## 1. Metrics function as scoring systems , rendering a singular value

judgment and making it official.

## 2. Metrics use data to render that judgment.

Not all data is packaged as a value. Data can be a neutral presentation of
information. But metrics are data transformed into targets. A metric presents

## Página 80

some direction as better: longer lifespans, faster student graduation rates,
more page views, higher customer satisfaction scores. In doing so, a metric
inherits any limitations within the data. So when we internalize a metric, we
put those limitations at the center of our being.
This would be fine if data were truly lossless—if data-based scoring
systems could capture everything that was important in the world. But they
don’t. To understand why, we need to see why metrics are the way they are.
We need to understand the design process by which we engineer metrics to
do a specific job. And we need to go to the root—to grasp what data is and
how it functions. We need to understand the inherent limitations of data.
Because data isn’t neutral. It is a specific format for understanding the
world, one that exhaustively documents quantitative information and
ignores qualitative information. It is a tool built for a very specific purpose.
We need to understand the purpose and design of that tool, to understand
when data-based approaches are appropriate—and when they are not.
Data is engineered information, and metrics are engineered values.
LET’S GET BACK TO OUR CORE WORRY: THAT WITH METRICS, easy countability
automatically wins out over actual importance . Imagine that we’re in the
public health sector, and we’re considering a policy proposal that doctors
should strongly urge patients to do everything they can to lower their
saturated fat intake. Lowering saturated fats nationally would lead to better
health outcomes: lowered heart attack numbers and better average
longevity. These are targets that speak in the loud, clear, inarguable
language of hard data.
We also lose something when we avoid saturated fats, but those losses
are harder to measure. Suppose our country has a long and rich tradition of
cooking based around saturated fats—butter, cheese, animal fat. If we
focused on cutting saturated fats, we could lose touch with our culinary
traditions, disconnect from our food heritage. We could lose out on some
profound culinary joys. I’m not saying that we shouldn’t care about lifespan
and heart attack rates. Those things are absolutely important. I’m just
saying that the other stuff is important, too—but they tend to be drowned
out because they’re harder to count.
Tradition, community, culinary joy—I think a lot of us are tempted to call
such things “intangibles.” But actually, what’s more tangible than a good

## Página 81

cheese or a heartwarming fondue party with your friends? They are, in fact,
among the most tangible and concrete of joys. What we actually mean is
that in our modern institutional environment, such joys are hard to quantify
with the measuring tools that come readily to hand. The problem isn’t that
cheese and dinner parties are intangible. It’s the precise opposite. The
problem with them, from the perspective of the modern world, is that
they’re hard to abstract . The goods of a gorgeous cheese are so obvious,
but also hard to put into some kind of metric that you can report up the
chain, aggregate in a spreadsheet, and then turn into a number that fits
nicely in a PowerPoint bullet. Cheese is glorious in the mouth, but hard to
express in the language of bureaucracy.
There’s a trade-off here. Data-based approaches are incredibly powerful,
but they narrow our focus to the parts of the world that are easier to
quantify. There is a cost—a loss of attention to the subtler parts of the
world. Sometimes, we may want to counterbalance data-based approaches
with other, more qualitative methods of judgment—or occasionally avoid
data-based approaches altogether. But it is very tempting to skip out on the
decision and let the data choose for us. It’s easy to forget the weird subtle
stuff, because we don’t have an easy metric for it.
You may have heard of Goodhart’s Law: “When a measure become a
target, it ceases to be a good measure.” Goodhart’s Law captures something
familiar. When people are given a thin, simplified metric, they will tend to
optimize only for what’s measured and ignore everything else. It’s
tempting, once we have this nicely official name for it, to stop there. But
naming it is only the beginning. Goodhart’s Law doesn’t actually explain
what’s going on under the hood. It doesn’t explain why thin metrics are so
captivating, even when they aren’t tied to incentives. (Remember how
compelling I found reducing my weight and leveling up my yoga, even
when I got nothing from it.) More important, Goodhart’s Law doesn’t
explain why metrics seem to systematically fail to capture what’s important.
Is it because the metrics we know are just sloppily made? Could we get
around the problem by building better metrics, or getting more of them? Or
is it something deeper: Some core feature of how metrics are, and how
they’re made?
We need a deeper understanding of why metrics are the way they are. We
need to see why institutions seem to prefer actively thin, simplified metrics.
And we need a better picture of the other side, too. We need to see why our

## Página 82

values are often so subtle and dynamic that they defy measurement by
institutional methods. We need to understand the weirdness of what matters.
Only then will we get a fuller picture of where metrics work well, and
where they flounder.
METRICS ARE BASED ON DATA, AND DATA IS A VERY SPECIFIC way of
understanding the world, better suited for some things than for others. Some
things are easy to capture in data; other things seem to elude its grasp. I’m
not saying that data is false. I’m saying it’s selective . Data-based methods,
as they occur in real-life institutions under real-life limitations,
systematically highlight some chunks of human life and ignore others.
One of the most informative, and profound, inquiries into the limits of
data comes from Theodore Porter, a historian who specializes in
1
quantification culture. His 1995 book, Trust in Numbers , is a pioneering
study of the social power of numbers. Porter is interested in why quantified
justification has become so predominant in political and bureaucratic life.
Institutional actors seem to prefer statistics of any kind—even obviously
bad ones—to richer, more qualitative modes of reasoning. Why do
politicians and bureaucrats compulsively reach for statistics to justify their
actions?
There are, says Porter, two basic modes of reasoning and justification.
Qualitative reasoning uses words and descriptions, and quantitative
reasoning uses numbers. For Porter, neither mode is essentially superior.
Each has its own distinctive strengths and weaknesses, and there’s always a
trade-off between them. But we have come to use the quantitative reasoning
compulsively, even when it’s not the best tool for the job.
Qualitative reasoning, says Porter, is nuanced and dynamic. If I give a
qualitative evaluation of something, I can choose, in that moment, which
terms I use, which dimensions I explore. I can add in new, unexpected
directions of evaluation, I can fill in necessary backstory. I can put in
anything I need that I think is relevant. Qualitative reasoning is open-ended
and flexible. We don’t fix ahead of time what we’re going to pay attention
to and record. We can improvise, on the spot, what we put in. Qualitative
reasoning can be contoured to the precise needs of the local context .
But that variability and flexibility has its downside. Qualitative reasons
travel poorly between contexts. They usually require a lot of shared

## Página 83

background to understand. And qualitative reasoning also doesn’t aggregate
well. There’s no easy, automatic way to add up a lot of different paragraphs
from different people to produce a single, collective summary.
Quantitative reasoning, on the other hand, travels easily between contexts
—because it’s been designed to. This is Porter’s central insight: Institutional
quantifications are engineered tools, forged for a specific purpose. They are
made to cross contexts . To be clear, Porter isn’t talking about every kind of
quantification. He’s not worried about math in principle. He’s talking about
the kinds of quantification that we typically find in institutions—that have
been formulated to fit the informational style of bureaucracy. He’s talking
about systems for counting and aggregation that are designed to work at
scale.
When we create an institutional quantification, we begin by creating a
context-invariant kernel . We want to identify the bit that makes sense across
contexts and strip off everything else—all the nuance, all the subtle stuff
that requires a lot of shared background to understand. Once we’ve isolated
that context-invariant kernel—once we’ve designed an info chunk that
everybody can understand, no matter their background—then we’ve created
a powerful tool. Everybody, from different contexts, can collect into that
same kernel. Everybody can understand the bits other people have
collected. And all our collection efforts will add up easily, because we’re
collecting into the same, fixed kernel. Quantified information can pass
easily between different contexts, because it’s been built to travel .
And it can aggregate easily, because we have stabilized a standard nugget
—a stackable, same-size box of information—for everybody to use.
Quantitative data is designed so that everybody collects the same kind of
thing, so that we can add them up easily. We fix the kernels, fix the
categories, in advance, to make that possible. But the cost is that we have to
decide ahead of time exactly which categories we’re going to collect into—
and we need everybody to use the same preset categories, or the data won’t
aggregate.
I’m a university professor. I spend a lot of my life grading student work.
For every student essay, I offer two evaluations: a qualitative evaluation in
the form of extended written feedback and commentary, and a quantitative
evaluation—a letter grade, in which every letter corresponds to a number, in
a way that has been standardized across American educational institutions.

## Página 84

When I’m writing qualitative evaluations, I can be quite flexible and
responsive. If one student is taking risks, pushing for a bold and original
new synthesis, I can comment on their originality, focus on their attempts to
create something new, and look at the big picture. If another student is
trying to precisely explain a tiny bit of difficult text, with absolute care and
attention to every detail, I can respond in kind, paying attention to how
carefully they’ve worked with the details, looking for tiny bits of text
they’ve missed. I can respond in multiple dimensions, praising their
originality but warning them for being sloppy—or praising their thorough
research but pushing them to be clearer about their overall argument. And I
can tailor my comments to their needs. If one student really wants to be a
journalist, we can focus on their writing quality. If another student cares
about their ability to argue in the courtroom, I can focus on the clarity and
crispness of their arguments.
And for all of this, I can use the language and the understanding we
forged together in class. In my classes, we often spend the entire semester
talking about what makes arguments strong or weak, what makes an
analysis rich or shallow. So my evaluations can lean on that solid
background. We can communicate richly because we’ve had time to
develop a shared language—with shared examples and shared moments.
But these kinds of rich qualitative assessments travel poorly. I know that
my written comments—steeped in the particular language and ideas of our
class—wouldn’t really be fully comprehensible to, say, a statistics
professor, or the dean of the business school, or a future employer in Silicon
Valley. (And the statistics professors’ and business professors’ qualitative
comments on their students’ work wouldn’t be fully comprehensible to me.)
Qualitative assessments don’t aggregate well, either. Imagine if a student
comes out of school with just a stack of hundreds of long open-ended
qualitative evaluations. Each one would discuss the student along a set of
different dimensions of quality—and different evaluations might use totally
different dimensions. My philosophy evaluations might discuss originality,
writing clarity, argumentative rigor, and insight. But evaluations from, say,
a computer science class might discuss a student’s problem-solving ability,
the precision of their coding, and their ability to work well in development
teams. From this mess of lush detail, there’s no easy way to generate an
automatic summary. The stack is useless to external examiners who need a

## Página 85

quick synopsis: law school admissions officers, future employers, all of
whom need to look through hundreds of résumés in an hour.
But think about what we had to shed to get this context-crossing ability to
aggregate. I have to leave out the little nuances that depend on our shared
time together. I have to leave out all the multidimensional complexity: that
this student was sloppy but original; that this other student is only all right
at logic, but amazing as a community builder. This is all stripped out. A
letter grade is a simple representation of a position on a single scale. And
that is exactly the point. That radical de-nuancing is the core design feature
of letter grades. Grades travel well across context because they have been
cut down to a single simple context-invariant kernel, which anybody can
understand. They are narrow by design.
QUALITATIVE REASONING DOESN’T ADD UP WELL, PRECISELY because it’s open-
ended. Each of us is allowed to put in what we think is important, and we
may not divide up the world in the same way. When we collect qualitative
information, we end up with a grab bag of all kinds of different things.
Qualitative reasoning can make use of subtle sensitivity. You can use your
experience, your training, and your hard-fought knowledge to make sense
of what’s important, to say what’s going on. But that kind of reasoning can’t
make its way into an institutional metric because it loses meaning as it
crosses contexts.
Quantitative information is designed to be portable . It travels easily
between contexts because it’s been prepared to do so, by having context-
sensitive bits stripped out. This is Porter’s portability theory of
quantification.
Porter is showing us the deep tension at the root of quantified
information. The power of quantification depends on us gathering an
enormous amount of information from various sources and aggregating it
into a small set of manageable numbers—like condensing an entire
student’s lifetime of work into a single GPA or condensing an entire school
district’s worth of students’ work into an aggregate GPA. That power gives
you an immense summary view. But the price of the summary is the loss of
context, the loss of nuance.
This is the thought that actually keeps me awake at night. Porter reveals a
grim truth about the heart of data. At the center of institutional

## Página 86

quantification is a single demand: that the evaluation procedure, and its
product, be comprehensible across contexts. And that demand profoundly
limits what the metric can measure.
Portability and the process of decontextualization are responsible for both
the power of data and its weakness. Data is powerful because it has been
designed to be universally comprehensible. It has more weight in any large-
scale social or institutional conversation precisely because it has been
engineered for easy use. But that engineering procedure involves,
necessarily, cutting out high-context understanding and specialized
sensitivity. The insensitive and de-contextualized nature is also precisely
why data speaks so loudly. The power of data is inextricable from its price.
SO HERE IS A FIRST PASS AT THE PROBLEM OF VALUE CAPTURE by metrics. You’re
pegging your values to some kind of institutional quantification. But we’ve
learned that institutional quantifications have a particular character. They
have two primary functions: They are built to cross contexts and to
aggregate easily. To do that job, they have to be narrowed down to a
context-invariant kernel that’s easily deployed by anybody in the institution.
In value capture, you’re taking that decontextualized nugget and
internalizing it. You’re letting it set your values. You’re guiding your life
using an evaluative technology that has been engineered to travel between
contexts, by stripping it of nuance. You’re centering a value that has been
built to ignore anything particular about your context and personality, and
anything that requires special sensitivity to deploy. You are making yourself
more comprehensible, but less particular.
Health and well-being measures typically target things like weight, BMI,
and lifespan. They generally don’t target things like joy, being surrounded
by richly beautiful things, or having a vivid social life. It’s not that there is
no way to describe the amount of joy in your life, and no difference
between a life surrounded by aesthetic texture and a life devoid of it. We
have plenty of ways to describe it—in words, in song, in poetry. But there’s
no institutional metric that tracks those things because understanding them
requires exactly the kind of intimacy and sensitivity that are intentionally
filtered out by metrics.
My deepest worry here is not that metrics are inevitably false. Rather,
they can be quite true of what they are measuring. But they speak so clearly

## Página 87

—so accessibly—that they can drown out our awareness of everything else.
Metrics tend to draw our attention to the easily and mechanically countable,
and away from subtler kinds of meaning.
PORTER’S THEORY IS A FIRST STEP TOWARD UNDERSTANDING the complex impact
of metrics. Things will get even more complicated from here because, it
will turn out, scoring systems and metrics serve a number of different
functions. They are a nexus point in a complex, interwoven set of
bureaucratic pressures.
It might be hard to keep track of all the moving parts, so let me offer a
mnemonic aid. One device we cognitively limited human beings use, when
faced with the astonishing complexity of the world, is to create myths—to
personify, in some easy-to-remember figures, the forces of the world. In an
earlier era, we had the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse—War, Famine,
Plague, and Death. These embodied the crucial forces that shaped an earlier
era. We still need myths to understand the world, but the world has
changed. So let me introduce a new set of myths, for our new age: the Four
Horsemen of Bureaucracy.
We have just met our first Horseman: Scale. And like all the other
Horsemen, Scale is no accident. He is no alien force. Scale’s power arises
from the basic workings of human life. Every Horseman places pressure on
us, but only because we want a job to be done. Think of the Horsemen as a
demanding kind of god: They will bring us a gift, but they will ask for a
sacrifice.
The Horseman of Scale gives us a powerful gift: He makes things
comprehensible across vast territories, across very different people. He
connects us quickly and easily. The Horseman of Scale makes coordinated
action possible across great numbers of people. This is useful for all sorts of
things: government bureaucracies trying to manage its citizens, corporations
seeking profit, scientists researching for the greater good. But Scale asks for
a sacrifice. To gain his power, we can no longer make nuanced judgments
and use our sensitive understanding that arises from our particular
background.
Scale gives us the power of portability. He asks us to sacrifice context.

## Página 88