# 22. There Is Too Much World

## CHAPTER 22

There Is Too Much World
o how do we live, as individuals and members of comfortably small-
scale communities, in the face of the vast powers of Rules, Scale,
S Parts, and Control? How do we retain our quieter sensitivities when
we’re met with the harsh voice of large-scale, de-nuanced communication?
Some people think we can solve the problem by building better metrics
—by changing our metrics to capture what’s really valuable and eliminating
the Gap. But we can now see why this won’t work. Metrics are, by their
nature, simplified and decontextualized, in order to be highly accessible. By
design, metrics flatten the complexity of value. They use and produce
unnuanced nuggets of information made to travel easily between contexts.
This is value simplification, and it is incredibly useful for institutional
functioning. It helps us coordinate very different people embedded in very
different contexts. But there is a cost for this communicative speed. The
designed portability of metrics is essentially at odds with the richness of
human value.
Maybe you want to get rid of metrics entirely. But that would be
incredibly costly, because metrics are such powerful tools, good for
coordinating collective action. There will probably always be metrics—and
we will probably always want them—as long as we continue to work
together in large-scale organized groups.
Maybe you think the price of decontextualization is so high that we
should give up on large-scale organizations. That’s what James Scott
thought. The problem, he said, was the states themselves—the fact that our
world is dominated by massive information-processing institutions whose
essential style of functioning makes them want to even out the world. So we
shouldn’t have them. We should break up the system of control, give up on
having big governments and big businesses and global markets. We should

## Página 189

try to live in small communities and avoid scaling up. This is why Scott was
an avowed anarchist (though the kind who was also a tenured professor at
Yale).
Perhaps this solution is satisfying to you, but it isn’t to me. For one thing,
I wouldn’t be alive without large-scale states. I have a number of chronic
medical problems that would have killed me. I need modern medicine and
the system of large-scale data collection that makes it work. Standardization
may crush souls, but it also saves lives.
For another thing, I suspect that small-scale communal life will be
unstable in the long run because of the power of scale. Massive, tightly
coordinated institutions are so efficient at producing some kinds of goods—
like weapons—that those groups willing to use the Four Horsemen’s
methods will tend to gain more power. The very existence of ideas and
technologies like mass production and factories shifts the balance of power
in the world. Small-scale communities can’t make nukes, tanks, or even
decent assault rifles—or vaccines. The Four Horsemen of Bureaucracy ask
a lot, but they give some very powerful gifts in return.
The problem is that we are pulled in two directions. There is a part of us
that is well served by intimate, small-scale life, where we can tailor our
values to our particular and peculiar selves—where we can be free to play.
But there is another part of us that craves the powers of scale—that benefits
from all the efficiencies and scientific magic enabled by the Four
Horsemen.
Maybe the solution, then, is to try to have it both ways. The Four
Horsemen aren’t all bad. They offer us potent trade-offs between different
ways of life. Maybe the best we can hope for is to manage those trade-offs
carefully—to take the trades only when they’re really worth it. We want to
use the Four Horsemen with care. We don’t want them to take over and
reshape our values in their image.
So maybe what we need is to separate the scales. We should permit the
Four Horsemen into the parts of our lives that profit enormously from the
power of scale, but reserve other domains for smaller-scale living. We do
something very much like that in governance. Many large nations are built
using the principle of federalism : You make national laws for the things that
only a large-scale nation can handle, but for the rest, you try to leave it to
state and local governments to decide for their own particular contexts—to
tailor, experiment, and customize independently.

## Página 190

What we need is value federalism . We need a few large-scale proxies so
we can work together when we need to—like reducing CO emissions and
2
poverty. But for a lot of the rest—for the values that rule our own choice of
art, fitness, hobbies, education, and career—we should mostly leave it to
individuals and small-scale communities to formulate independently. And
cultivating those smaller-scale values will also give us a perspective outside
the metrics, which will help us to see when the metrics have gone too far
astray.
One thing we know from the actual history of people and metrics is that
we rarely stick to value federalism. The big clear metrics tend to swamp
more intimate values. So to build a lasting value federalism, we will need to
understand exactly why metrics tend to dominate our hearts and our
bureaucracies—and how we might resist.
TO START, LET’S TAKE A BIG STEP BACK TO GET A PHILOSOPHER’S view from a
million miles in the air. There is a central source for the problems and
tensions and pressures we’ve talked about in this book: There is too much
world.
The world is incredibly complicated. There is simply too much of it for a
single human being to cope with. If we tried to deal with it all ourselves—if
we flung ourselves raw and alone at the hugeness of the world—we would
be utterly overwhelmed. So we have developed strategies for coping with
the world. We simplify, we build tools, and we cooperate.
One of our most powerful strategies for managing the chaotic world is
categorization . We mostly don’t think about each particular pine tree. We
mostly learn things about pine trees in general. We take something we learn
about a few pine trees and then apply it to all pine trees. This is how science
works. It is, in fact, how most human thinking works. We are lumpers by
nature. I don’t have to start from scratch with every new dog I meet because
I know stuff about dogs. They like to play fetch and get belly scratches,
unless they’re growling, which means back away. What I’m doing here is
porting over information from other dogs I’ve met and making some
assumptions that generally work out. Lumping things together turns down
the resolution of the world. It makes the world easier to handle by deleting
details. We just hope that we’re deleting the right ones.

## Página 191

To cooperate in information gathering, we need to categorize together .
This is why we use classification systems, which are a tool to ensure that
we are cutting up the world in a similar way. If we do so, then we can
multiply the time-saving power of categorization by the time-saving power
of cooperation. A few of us can learn a few things about a few particular
pine trees, and now, hopefully, everybody knows those things about pine
trees. Collective categorization is an extraordinarily efficient device when it
works. It lets individuals mostly skip looking at particular parts of the
world, which works really well—again, as long as we’re not skipping
anything important.
Another way we cooperate is by specializing . The philosopher Elijah
Millgram puts it this way: The essential feature of the modern world is that
science is so complicated that nobody can understand it all by themselves.
We need to break up the world into pieces and each specialize in a different
piece. But this creates the basic problem of the modern world: The
specialists don’t understand each other. Our specialties—chemistry,
computer science, environmental science, music, engineering, economics,
history, philosophy—are each so complex and arcane that no single human
can understand all the sciences, or even a tenth of them. So we end up
having to trust each other—trust our lives to doctors and aeronautical
engineers—without being able to understand everything for ourselves. And
this puts us in a peculiar position. There is no single person who completely
understands how to build a car or a nuclear power plant. There is nobody
who fully understands how a particular dose of antibiotic works. The
knowledge is scattered across so many statisticians, physicists, computer
modelers, engineers, materials scientists, biochemists, cellular biologists,
virologists, industrial process engineers, and on and on. Every modern
1
thought is a fragile chain that crosses a thousand arcane islands, each
moderately opaque to the next. And this creates a tension. We have a
general simple language that we can talk with each other in, but it doesn’t
catch all the details that matter. It’s just a useful, simplifying bridge. And
then we have specialist languages full of jargon and detail and subtlety that
catch so much more—but they do not travel well outside their little
specialist niches.
We also build tools to help us deal with the overcomplicated world. We
invent technologies. There is too much math to do, so we invent calculators
and spreadsheets. The world is too large to remember everything we know,

## Página 192

so we write things down in notebooks, we collect scientific principles in
articles and reference books, we store things in databases. We build these
technologies to augment our limited capacities and offload much of the
mental strain.
Remember, I said that the problem of value capture is that we’re
outsourcing. But this was also an oversimplification. Because outsourcing
by itself isn’t always bad. We’re constantly outsourcing to cope with the
oversize world. We’re outsourcing our memory to notebooks and document
files. We’re outsourcing our math to calculators and spreadsheets. We’re
outsourcing our medical knowledge to doctors, our car knowledge to
mechanics. And each of the people and things we’re outsourcing to is in
turn outsourcing to other people and things. Our trust is fractal and expands,
rootlike, into incomprehensibly diverse sources. It turns out it’s not just that
we’re too small to know everything about the world, so we have to
outsource. It’s that we’re too small to even keep track of everything we’re
outsourcing to.
I have been railing against value capture by external metrics and
rankings, but here’s an honest truth: I use rankings all the time. When I
wanted to buy a new refrigerator, I just looked up the rankings online, did a
tiny bit of checking to see if the thing met my needs, and bought one of the
top-ranked ones. Because I don’t have time to investigate everything
deeply, and I sure as hell am not going to waste my valuable time learning
about the intricacies of refrigerators. I just want to buy a decent one and
then get on with the rest of my life. So I outsourced that decision, because
refrigerators aren’t that important to me, and because my needs for
refrigeration are pretty normal. And every piece of technology has value
decisions embedded into its basic design. When I buy a computer, I have
outsourced all sorts of value decisions—about the relative value of
durability versus cost, about ease versus security. Every time I take a
vitamin, I am outsourcing both scientific knowledge about natural facts and
value decisions about which health benefits are most important. Our
technological systems are dripping with values, stuffed full of other
people’s complex decisions, and when we start using any technology, we’re
always outsourcing some of our values.
We have to outsource because we just don’t have enough time to think
about everything. But we also don’t want to outsource willy-nilly. We don’t
want to outsource away our whole souls. We want to outsource less

## Página 193

important decisions to make more room for the really important decisions.
And we want to outsource to the right resources; we want to trust the right
people and the right technologies.
We’ll never get it all perfect. That’s the essential and inescapable danger
of outsourcing. Because when we outsource, we are deciding not to look
too closely at some chunk of the world. Maybe there is deep mystery and
wonder in fridge design, and maybe I could have embraced a new part of
my humanity if I’d spent time there. But I made a quick, underinformed
decision to outsource that part of my life. And the danger is that I might
outsource what I thought was a minor matter, but it turns out to be
massively important. I might never know how complex and important it
really is, because the whole point of outsourcing is to let me skip out on
thinking about it.
2
The philosopher Annette Baier said that the essence of trust was making
yourself vulnerable by putting some part of yourself into somebody else’s
power. That is what we are always doing when we trust somebody else.
When I trust a doctor, I cannot verify for myself that their advice is sound,
because I simply don’t have the time and energy to learn enough medicine
to do so. I am making myself vulnerable to their competence and their
goodness. And the same is true every time I trust a review about a car or a
fridge. And we are inevitably going to screw some of it up. Trust is fraught,
imperfect, dangerous—and impossible to avoid. So we need to manage it
carefully.
Just how do we manage our outsourcing and our trust? Let’s start with
the basics. We do well when we manage our outsourcing to suit our
purposes. We outsource badly when we choose resources that run counter to
our purposes. And we outsource disastrously when we let some external
entity rewrite our core values to suit their distant purposes.
We want to use our tools; we don’t want our tools to use us. We want to
retain reflective control. So why isn’t the answer just that simple? Go ye
forth into the world and exert reflective control. It’s just like with recipes:
Use them to explore, but don’t let them dictate what you want. Follow
recipes to learn, but then let yourself be free. Problem solved.
But metrics make it hard to exert reflective control. They can seduce us
into abandoning the truly important decisions. We’ve seen how they reshape
the world and flatten it. In part five, I want to go back inside our
psychologies and look at how we experience this reshaped, metrified world

## Página 194

—to really see how incredibly seductive it is. We will study how the world
of metrics sucks us into unreflective acceptance of other values, how it
makes reflective control difficult—and what we can do about it.
The big goal of part five is to think about how we live with the Four
Horsemen without giving in to them. To figure this out, we’ll need to
answer some questions.
First, why is it so hard to check metrics at the door? Why do they tend to
invade everything, and then conceal the fact that they’ve invaded?
Second, where do metrics work well, and where should we try to limit
their use?
And third, how do we limit metrics? How do we keep them from
redefining everything in the insensitive language of the Four Horsemen?
How do we retain space for our own odd, variant, inchoate values? And
how do we build social institutions and technologies that will help us keep
metrics on a leash?
Our guiding light will be games—because games exemplify how we can
use scoring systems for our own weird purposes. They give us a hint to how
we can build a world that constantly reminds us to exercise reflective
control.

## Página 195