# 20. Centralizing Values

## CHAPTER 20

Centralizing Values
hings are profoundly different in the world of metrics and other
institutional data systems. The point of a metric is to permit quick
T comparison at scale. You want to be able to compare the GPA of
different students from different schools. So we need to stabilize how we
collect grades and what those grades mean. This enforced standardization
creates an essential rigidity at the heart of metrics. You can’t house-rule

## GPA.

This might seem obvious at first. Metrics are external systems, after all.
But there is a reason for that, which we need to get clear on. We could try to
permit house-ruling metrics. You could let professors create their own,
different in-house grading systems, and let governments create in-house
rankings systems. We could let a thousand metrics bloom. But that would
fail to serve the central functions of metrics: to coordinate at scale, and to
be generated by and understandable to an ever-changing set of modular and
interchangeable workers following explicit and transparent procedures.
If we diversified our metrics, they would then fail to serve their final and
most important function: to centralize how we measure values.
IN SEEING LIKE A STATE , JAMES SCOTT OFFERS A SWEEPING VISION of how
centralization transforms our lives. It is a study of how states systematically
1
reshape the world to make it easier to manage.
A “state,” according to Scott, is any large-scale information-processing
organization: a government, a large corporation, the integrated global
financial market. Crucially, Scott finds the same basic logic and problems in
both centralized communist bureaucracies and capitalist free-market
economies. Both, for Scott, are states. These work by gathering a vast

## Página 177

amount of information from faraway places and then funneling that
information into some kind of administrative center—a place where
information gets analyzed, summarized, and fed to key decision-makers.
They use that summarized information to make decisions, and then push
those decisions back out to the edges. Maybe those decision-makers are
government administrators looking at production quotas; maybe they are
CEOs looking at profits and units shipped. But in both cases, information
gets compressed, stripped of context, and summarized for a small set of
central authorities—and then simple, universal policies get composed by
those authorities and pushed back out to the world.
States, says Scott, can only “see” the parts of the world that they can
process through bureaucratic systems. They can only see the parts of the
world they can classify, measure, and summarize. That is what is legible to
the state. The rest of the world—all the stuff that’s too mushy and variable
and weird to be well tracked by state tools—is illegible to the state. States
have a hard time tracking and managing the irregular parts of the world.
They prefer the parts of the world that fit well into a standardized
classification system, that can be turned into data, that can be managed with
standardized procedures and fungible workers.
Scott gives us examples aplenty. Older cities were laid out in labyrinthine
mazes, highly irregular and often adapted to the local landscape. But such
mazes are illegible to the state. Suppose you’re a local who knows a
particular neighborhood well. Now a government representative—a tax
collector, a police officer—is trying to track you down. It’s easy for you to
run and hide. The highly variable, inconsistent maze of streets gives the
advantage to the local. Similarly, when the people of the city are rebelling
against the government, the state will need to send in troops, which it
gathers from somewhere else. If the city streets are laid out in an irregular
labyrinth, then the local rebels have a major advantage. If, on the other
hand, the streets are arranged in a regular pattern—like a simple grid—then
the locals lose their advantage. There is nothing distinctively local for them
to have specialized knowledge of. The state can gather an army of soldiers
from all over the place who easily navigate the grid. This is why the French
government responded to a massive citizen revolt by rebuilding Paris into a
simple hub-and-spoke pattern. It made the city more legible to a military
made of soldiers from everywhere.

## Página 178

The same is true, says Scott, of the natural world. A world of incredibly
variable biodiversity and deeply specific local ecosystems is hard for the
state to control. The state prefers to make all the ecosystems in its purview
more similar—so it can be easier for a workforce drawn from all over the
world to come in and extract resources from any given chunk. This is why,
Scott says, forestry management often involves choices that reduce
complexity and biodiversity—like replanting forests with a smaller number
of species, or planting trees in regular rows—which make it easier for state-
level processes to manage and optimize.
What’s legible to the state are the parts of the world that are counted
through standardized categories and then aggregated. But these techniques,
says Scott, are particularly bad at seeing and coping with local variation.
The methodology of centralized thinking and decision-making does well
when the world is even, regular, and maximally standardized, and does
poorly when the world remains subtle, diverse, and variable. What is
illegible to the state are the details that vary between local contexts. They
defy summarization in terms of standard categories. So that kind of
information is lost to the decision-making center. The state can see only
what the state can process .
So states do better—they are more powerful, more intrusive, and more
capable of managing their world competently—when the world is formatted
in ways that are more legible. States function better when the world is more
regular. This is Scott’s central insight: The state is motivated to reshape the
world to make it more legible . The state wants to tear down labyrinthine
streets and rebuild its cities into neat grids, and replant forests into neat
rows. It wants farms that have similar soil and plant similar crops using
similar methods. The more the world has been reshaped to fit neatly into
mechanical categories, the more of the world the state can see. And the
more regular the world is, the easier it is for the state to compose simple
standard policies that will work everywhere.
WHEN WE COMBINE SCOTT’S VISION OF STATES WITH WHAT WE’VE learned about
mechanical rules, we can catch a glimpse of the heart of this whole
business.
States prefer to use fungible workers . A state loves to have fungible
soldiers, police officers, and tax collectors. And states create the

## Página 179

prerequisite background conditions for fungibility. When you put a city on a
grid pattern, you eliminate the advantage of specialized local knowledge by
eliminating anything distinctive about a particular local area . Once
everything is evened out and similar, then everybody is on equal footing.
This kind of engineered accessibility is an advantage when you’re a visitor
—a tourist or a tax collector. But it requires us to destroy much of the
distinctiveness and variety of local areas.
Scott has shown us how states rebuilt the external, physical world to
make it more legible. I’m suggesting that this also applies to our insides.
States also want people’s minds to be more legible. States would prefer it if
our thoughts and desires were more regular and easier to summarize. They
would prefer that people think in terms of standardized categories instead of
their own local intellectual dialects. And states would prefer it if our
motivations were standardized—if people valued standardized targets
instead of following their own illegible muses. The many people of the
world are harder to manage if they have each cultivated their own peculiar
sense of meaning—if they each want wildly different kinds of beauty, joy,
community, and connection. People will be far more legible to the state if
they all just want simple things like longer lifespan, more money, and more
page views.

## WE CAN NOW NAME THE FOURTH AND FINAL HORSEMAN OF BUREAUCRACY:

Control.
The Horseman of Control wants to make decisions in an organized way,
from a central location. Control wants to coordinate actions across a vast
institution, across many contexts. (His full name is Centralized Control.)
This means Control wants to compress information and send it to a central
location, and then issue decisions and push them out to the world. Control is
not necessarily authoritarian or malicious. He simply wants to make sense
of the world, and then make decisions in a rational and informed way—and
enact those decisions upon the world in a coordinated way.
Control gives us the power of complex large-scale institutions, of many
people working together precisely. Control lets us harness the power of vast
datasets and vast numbers of people working together. He gives us
consistency, stability, and a more predictable world. What Control asks us

## Página 180

to give up is the ability to tailor the way we navigate the world to our own
context.
Control offers us the power of coordination . What he asks us to sacrifice
is autonomy .

## Página 181