# 19. Islands of Meaning

## CHAPTER 19

Islands of Meaning
lay is the opposite of standardization. Play occurs on an island—on
millions of different islands. Different games have different scoring
P systems, built for different reasons. When we play games, we
disunify.
Johan Huizinga, one of the great scholars of play, said that play occurs in
a magic circle —a space segregated from the rest of the world. In the magic
1
circle of play, we take on alternate roles, alternate cares. Actions change
their meaning.
Here’s what it looks like in ordinary life. My spouse and I love each
other; we spend our days cooperating on a million little things. We try to
support each other, care for each other, protect each other. And then it’s
nighttime. We’ve put the kids to bed and we finally have some time to
ourselves. And then, with our tiny bit of remaining energy, we do the
strangest thing: We spend the rest of the night trying to kill each other. We
play a board game.
First, we talk about which board game to play, about which one fits our
mood. Our decision process is supportive, cooperative, communal. And
then the game starts, and everything changes. I analyze her every move,
search for vulnerabilities. My whole consciousness is tuned to her
destruction and ruin—at least of her in-game self. But the whole time,
we’re also being quite nice to each other outside the game—amusing each
other, making each other drinks. There is a remarkable division between our
full self and our in-game self.
2
Games scholar Annika Waern puts it this way: Crossing into and out of
the game space involves crossing a boundary of meaning , in which we have
agreed to reinterpret a prespecified set of actions. The fact that I attack my

## Página 173

spouse all-out inside the game in no way undercuts my love for her outside
the game.
This is another essential feature of the social technology of games. The
meanings of what happens in the game are quarantined from the rest of life.
They’re not perfectly quarantined: If we’re playing a game and I try to
distract you by revealing your most embarrassing secrets or stomping on
your toes with my boots, then I’ve really wronged you. But for a specific
set of actions indicated by the game, their meanings are cut off from the rest
of the world; there is a boundary between games and the rest of the world.
This quarantine also allows for one of the moral wonders of gameplay:
the power of moral transformation. Games can turn competition into
cooperation.
Let’s say we’re striving players, and our purpose for this game is to have
a good time together—and we happen to be the kind of people who like
cutthroat investment board games. Our larger goal is collective fun. But
during the game, each of us can just go all-out for competition. We can
throw ourselves into a purely brutal mindset because games are carefully
designed structures that convert aggression into fun.
This doesn’t apply to achievement players, however. Achievement
players actually care, in a deep and lasting way, about winning the game.
Achievement play is a zero-sum activity. If two players are competing and
they both truly just want to win, they can’t both get what they want. But
striving players are different. If two striving players are playing a
competitive game, they can both get what they really want. Their interest in
winning is just a disposable end; what they really want is an interesting
struggle. And in a competitive game, we can’t both win, but we can both
have an interesting struggle.
This is possible because the attitude of striving play, along with the social
practice of magic circles, isolates the gaming environment from the rest of
the world. It’s possible because the points in the game are detached from
the rest of the world—because in striving play, winning doesn’t actually
matter.
This explains what’s wrong with a certain kind of gamer asshole—the
kind who exports that attitude of all-out brutality from the game out into the
real world. This is the financial wizard who plays the stock market like a
game, manipulating the world to max out their score. In real games, striving
players have a license to be utterly ruthless. They can use every tool at their

## Página 174

disposal to achieve victory. This is safe in real games, because games are
little quarantine zones for meaning, where you attack temporary constructs
and where all the players have consented to be, for a little while. But if you
take that attitude out to the real world—where what you do actually matters
and permanently impacts other people’s real resources and real lives—then
you’re just evil.
WE HAVE A BETTER ANSWER NOW TO OUR ORIGINAL QUESTION. Why do games
and metrics hit so different when they both have a mechanical scoring
system at their core?
Metrics are an unbounded scoring system. They reach across the human
universe, aiming to speak and coordinate more and more of it, to put it
under a single standard of value. They make claims about the value of all
work, about the healthiness of all foods, about the productivity of all
countries.
Games differ from metrics in two important ways. First, each game is
tightly bounded . We aren’t trapped in a game forever; we’re not married to
its conception of victory. This is built into how games work. We finish a
game, we close up the box. We save our game and turn off the gaming
console. And when striving players do so, they also step back from the
meanings and values set by the in-game victory conditions. This easy
fluidity also encourages a certain reflective distance. It encourages us to ask
ourselves, from a perspective outside the scoring system: Was it fun? Was it
lovely? Games push us to practice fluidity, stepping in and out of the
game’s conception of success.
Second, there are many games , made for many purposes . The mechanical
rules and scoring systems of games aren’t standardized. They are isolated
from one another. There is no reason to integrate them into a world-
spanning monolith. Each game is its own island; each offers an alternate
universe of meaning.
The technology of metrics is oriented toward coordination, so it tends
toward a monolith of scoring. The technology of games is oriented toward a
splintering of games and scoring systems—and a splintering of our
purposes for making and playing games. Each game can be built differently,
to satisfy a different set of players.

## Página 175

Instead of giving us a single, universal, lock-step procedure for how to
value things, games encourage us to try on radically different ways of
valuing. The ecosystem of games supports genuine reflective choice by
exposing us and giving us opportunities to choose between different ways
of acting and of living—and the deeply different values underneath.
This splintering, this detachment is also what enables us to tailor games.
When we play Dungeons & Dragons, we’re free to add our own house
rules. Let’s say we want a more brutal experience, so we add some home-
cooked rules about bleeding to death. Does this make our game harder or
easier? Are experience points in our bleeding variant worth more, or less?
And if more, how much more? There are no official answers to these
questions. If you won second place at the regional skateboarding
competition and I set a new speedrunning record for a new variant speedrun
of Super Mario Odyssey , who did better? We can’t really say. The two
scoring systems don’t interoperate; the points don’t translate across.
And more important, we don’t need to translate the points. Because
games aren’t beholden to each other. With games, we’re under no pressure
to stabilize the meanings of points between games or provide a precise
mathematical translation system. Games are a space where meanings can
wander free.

## Página 176