# 23. Objectivity Laundering

## CHAPTER 23

Objectivity Laundering
etrics hit us on two fronts. First, they discourage reflection and
exploration by creating a facade of objectivity . Reflective control
M involves making a choice, but metrics disguise and rewrite the
situation so that we don’t realize there was a space for choice. Metrics try to
speak with the voice of scientific authority; they make it seem like there is
no room for dissent. Second, metrics offer us the pleasures of seductive
clarity . They make things look so simple that we won’t think there is
anything else to investigate. They present themselves as the bottom line—as
the final word, as a finished thought. These are the two masks of metrics,
which conceal our freedom to choose: the mask of fake objectivity and the
mask of seductive clarity.

## LET’S START WITH THE MASK OF FAKE OBJECTIVITY.

Theodore Porter, the historian of quantification, wanted to understand
why bureaucrats and politicians seem to obsessively and unthinkingly reach
for quantitative justification. Administrators often seem to prefer metrics to
any other form of justification, even when those metrics are clearly flawed
or incomplete. This is because, says Porter, metrics gave the appearance of
objectivity—which lets their users avoid taking responsibility. Metrics let
administrators avoid visibly inserting themselves into the stream of
decision-making so that instead, they can point to the metric and say, “It’s
not me, it’s just the numbers.”
But this objectivity is only a facade. Such metrics often contain value
judgments hidden at the core. We take a subjective choice and then hide it
under tons of precise math. It’s like money laundering, where we take dirty
money and then pass it through enough clean transactions to mask the dirt.

## Página 196

Let’s call this objectivity laundering. We take a complex matter, like
well-being, education, or success. Somebody—often, a very distant
somebody—makes a value-laden decision about what that means, about
what counts as well-being or success. Then we process it. What comes out
the other end looks objective and free of any taint of human values. It seems
to speak with the voice of God—or at least the voice of science.
This is the first way that metrics worm their way into our hearts: by
presenting themselves as simple matters of fact. They try to convince us
that we never had a choice about the matter in the first place. The more
1
universal and objective that metric looks, the more we are tempted to treat
it as a given.
I’m worried that in many of our cases, we’re playing the role of the
responsibility-avoiding bureaucrat in our own lives. We’re hiding from the
complexity of our value decisions by following an apparently objective
metric. But really, we are deferring to the values hidden within that metric.
The existentialist philosophers had a term for this: acting in bad faith . What
they meant was that we humans have the freedom to choose, but sometimes
we try to avoid that freedom. We deceive ourselves into thinking that we
have no choice in the matter, that we are acting in the only way possible.
We are pretending to be mechanical objects. Jean-Paul Sartre thought we
often did this by following the scripts attached to our roles and social
identities—letting ourselves think that we had no choice because we are a
parent, or a police officer, or an American, and that’s simply what we had to
do.
Value capture is the new bad faith.
THERE ARE DIFFERENT STRATEGIES FOR OBJECTIVITY LAUNDERING . The first is
burying the values. This happens when we take a value-laden decision and
bury it under a mountain of objective mechanical processing, so that we
lose sight of the original value-laden choice.
2
Historian Mary Poovey gives a fantastic example of burying the values,
from early in the history of quantification culture. She was interested in
understanding the history of something she called “the modern fact” in
Western civilization. Before the modern era, she says, we had a very
different idea of what made a good fact. We trusted a fact if it came from a

## Página 197

trustworthy person—somebody honest, reliable, and competent. Good facts
came from good people.
But somewhere on the road to our contemporary world, things changed.
We started using a new conception of a fact, a new standard for
trustworthiness. A fact was good because it came from nobody in
particular . It was trustworthy if it came not from a good person, but via a
mechanical process. Facts were trustworthy if nothing human had tainted
them. They came either from a literal machine or from people who were
following clear mechanical rules, which made them into the functional
equivalent.
This is the idea behind the modern practice of science and data
collection. But, says Poovey, the idea of the inhuman modern fact actually
shows up a little bit before the birth of the sciences—in the sixteenth-
century invention of double-entry bookkeeping.
Double-entry bookkeeping is a methodology, a precise set of clear and
mechanical rules for processing the numbers in your accounting books and
double-checking your calculations. Since the rules are mechanical, anybody
can do the math, and anybody else can check over the accounting process.
Accounting, says Poovey, is the first place where we see moral virtue and
human competence displaced from the center of our ideal of human
knowledge and replaced with trust in a mechanical system. The precision
and transparency of the system is what lends credibility to the bookkeeping
procedure. Accounting, it turns out, is the birthplace of our modern
conception of objectivity—in which human virtue is replaced with
mechanical precision. (And Poovey finds direct evidence that the early
innovators of science knew of, admired, and actively imitated the methods
of double-entry bookkeeping.)
But that mechanical objectivity is incomplete, says Poovey. There is,
hidden at the very root, an entirely nonmechanical, non-inspectable
procedure: how we set the starting values. Let’s say you’re a merchant with
an inventory. When you start using this system of double-entry
bookkeeping, you need to enter a value into your books for each item in
your inventory. Once you’ve entered those values, the wholly mechanical
system takes over. But there are no mechanical rules for the initial
valuation. That can come from anywhere—intuition, experience,
guesswork, bias, fabrication. But despite that raw, uncontrolled core
element, we trust the books because the rest of it is so clear. The

## Página 198

subjectivity of the initial input is concealed by the mechanical objectivity of
the ensuing processing.
This kind of objectivity laundering remains very common. Economic
cost-benefit analyses usually depend on some obscured but crucial value
decisions inserted quietly into the calculations. Here’s an example from
Porter: The National Park Service often uses cost-benefit analysis to justify
investments in infrastructure. It’s relatively easy to calculate, in a fairly
objective manner, the projected profits for local businesses from increased
tourist traffic. But the National Park Service also has to calculate the value
of visiting the park for the tourists themselves—to attach an economic value
3
to enjoying nature. So they set one. One 1948 cost-benefit analysis set the
“recreational value” of each tourist visit at 12.5 cents per visitor day.
Recreation is a key value of the national parks, but there is no objective
basis for this value—it is a human decision about the value of experiencing
natural beauty. But the end result is a cost-benefit analysis that looks
objective, because we’ve piled a lot of accounting on top of that
recreational value.
There is another obscure-sounding but utterly crucial example of burying
the value, and it’s pervasive throughout all cost-benefit calculations: the
discount rate . Whenever we are doing a cost-benefit analysis of present
costs versus future gains, even if every other number is entirely objective,
there is inevitably one crucial number that is not. The discount rate is how
much we discount the value of future goods compared with present goods .
Let’s say we need to invest a thousand dollars today in a chocolate factory,
and we will get a return of eleven hundred dollars next year. Should we do
it? Is it worth losing control of that amount of money now to get that slight
profit later? The answer is not an objective matter, because it depends on
how we set the discount rate—how we decide to value future goods
compared with present goods. If we set the discount rate at 0 percent, then
we’re saying we think a future potential dollar is precisely as valuable as a
dollar in the hand right now. In that case, we should certainly invest in the
chocolate factory. If we set the discount rate low—at 5 percent per year,
say, then we should also still do it. But if we set the discount rate high—
let’s say 20 percent per year—then we should not make that investment. By
that discount rate, $1,100 in next-year dollars is worth only $880 in present-
year dollars. Most economists think setting a discount rate of 0 percent is
ludicrous, because it licenses almost any investment with even marginal

## Página 199

gains—since marginal future gains, multiplied over the massive time-span
of the whole future, will outweigh almost any present cost. We need some
4
kind of discount rate, but there is no consensus on what the right discount
rate actually is.
Every cost-benefit analysis must set some discount rate, but there is no
objectively correct rate. It is a value decision about how much future goods
are worth compared with present goods—a decision about the relative value
of the future. But it is hidden, so the cost-benefit analysis appears cleansed
of subjectivity—an immaculate conception of pure math.
ON TO THE SECOND KIND OF OBJECTIVITY LAUNDERING; LET’S call it the
objectivity bait and switch . This is when we take a complex,
multidimensional quality, often with a lot of freedom of choice, and
substitute a simpler quality that is genuinely more objective. If you are
convinced that the simpler measure captures everything important, then the
whole process will seem entirely objective. But the value decision is hidden
almost out of sight—in the initial decision of which simple quality to sub
in.
It can be easy to miss the bait and switch, so let’s start with a clear case. I
was once talking about this stuff in one of my big lecture introductory
classes, and a student from the back row—a dude who definitely worked
out—raised his hand and said, “But what if we’re just measuring something
that’s already totally objective? Like if you want to get fit and healthy,
weight loss is objectively measurable.” And the obvious reply is: “When
did we start thinking that health meant weight loss?” And when I said that,
the class kind of rippled with nervous shock and laughter. What some of
them said after was: It was so obvious once somebody pointed it out to
them, but they were shocked that they’d needed it pointed out. Because,
obviously, health isn’t weight loss, but it’s easy, somehow, to get sucked
into thinking that way.
The crucial point here is that the value-laden decision isn’t hiding in the
way we measure weight. Weight really is just a simple, objective
measurement. The value-laden decision is one step back, in the decision to
use weight as a stand-in for health in the first place.
OK, now for a much more complicated example. Let’s look at a hundred-
point rating scale that dominates the modern wine world. Wine scorers have

## Página 200

tried to make the process as objective as possible. This means a few things.
For one, professional wine tasters usually spit out the wine—to avoid
getting drunk, so that they can render an objective judgment. For another
thing, professional wine tasters, when officially scoring a wine, have it
without food . This is because having wine with food would create too much
variability in the judging process. A wine that might be incredible with a
roast chicken might be only decent with fried chicken, and might disappear
next to a peppery steak. So, to create a more stable, objective judgment, the
5
official wine-judging process excludes food.
But for many people, much of the joy of wine is how it reacts with food.
Wine can change and shift with every sip, reacting dynamically to different
bites. And there are different relationships it can have with food; it can be a
sharp contrast or a resonant match. But this level of variability would create
incredible difficulties for an official scoring process. How could you score a
“best” wine if one is incredibly good with tomato sauces but kind of listless
with anything else, and then rank it against a wine that is moderately good
with every food? So we create an artificially stabilized context; we cut out
the variability. We score wine without food. But if we follow that wine-
scoring system, we have implicitly adopted a value choice: that objective
scoring is more important than the relationship between wine and food.
And that value choice feeds back into the wine itself. The wine-scoring
system is transforming the winemaking world, pushing it toward “fruit
bombs”—wines with big, bombastic flavors. And since high scores mean
better sales, many winemakers have started making more and more fruit
bombs. But those wines, though they perform better in the sterile,
controlled environment of the wine-scoring process, usually don’t react in
interesting ways to food. If you grow up in the era of these new fruit bombs,
though, you might never know that wine could react so powerfully and
variably to food. The wine-scoring system has written itself into reality by
transforming the wine-growing industry, blotting out dynamic wines and
filling the world with stable and unreactive ones.
OK, now for the most complicated example. Let’s get back to the concept
of “healthy.” We already saw one mistake—substituting weight loss for
health. This is a common mistake, but relatively easy to see. But health is
also subject to more sophisticated forms of the objectivity bait and switch.
The philosopher Elizabeth Barnes suggests that our metrics and measures
for health often end up obscuring our free choice under the veil of science.

## Página 201

People act as if there is a single objective quality—health—and a single
objective measure for it. If that were true, then health would be something
we could measure scientifically—and then establish a singular and
objective list of best practices. But this is a mistake, she says—a
misunderstanding of what health is. There will, according to Barnes, never
be a single clear metric for health, nor will there be a one-size-fits-all set of
best practices for all people to pursue health. This is because health is not a
static thing, stable across all people. It is a concept that contains, hidden
within it, some freedom to choose. What health is depends on a complex set
of decisions about what we value about our bodies and capabilities. And
6
different people will make those decisions in different ways.
First, a quick primer from the philosophy of language. Some words have
a stable meaning. The meanings of the words apple and four will usually
stay the same in different contexts. But other words have a meaning that
varies with context, like tall . Am I tall? That depends. Am I tall for a human
being? I’m a bit taller than the average human. Am I tall for a professional
basketball player? Absolutely not. Such terms change meaning depending
on a comparison class. Terms like fit and healthy can also work like this.
Am I fit? That depends. Compared with the average academic philosopher,
7
I’m fit as hell. Compared with the average rock climber, I’m a weak slob.
The meaning of health has a very special form of contextual variability,
says Barnes. The meaning changes from person to person depending on
each person’s interests . I ask my doctor: Is my knee healthy? Does my
current exercise routine support a healthy knee? But there is no single
objective answer to that question because the meaning of health fluctuates,
depending on my interests and goals. There are limits to that flux: No
matter your interests, being run over by a bulldozer is unhealthy for your
knees. But within those limits, the exact meaning of “health” depends on
your particular interests.
Suppose Samantha is an Olympic sprinter. She is interested in whether
she will be able to stand up to the rigors of competition and have a chance
at a gold medal two years from now. If she has to trade off some late-life
functionality and pain for short-term success, she’ll do it. Health for her
involves short-term high-end athletic functionality. I, on the other hand, am
a casual rock climber. I climb to relax, for mental health, and because I love
the beauty of the movement. And I run mostly as cross-training, to balance
out the abuse that climbing puts on certain joints. I am most interested in

## Página 202

whether my knees can keep me climbing well into my sixties, which will
include regular ten-foot falls onto a gymnastic pad. If I have to accept some
pain in order to continue climbing as long as possible, I will, and I am
willing to sacrifice short-term optimal performance for long-term
functionality. Health for me involves balancing longevity with moderate
athletic functionality, while accepting some degree of pain. Or you might be
interested in how long you can continue to walk pain-free, as late in life as
possible. Health for you involves long-term functionality, but weighting
pain reduction over athletic performance.
The notion of health is essentially fuzzy, says Barnes. It’s an
approximation—the vague center of gravity of a cluster of different
people’s interests. There are a lot of things that the sprinter, the climber, and
the walker will have in common, and there are some broad generalities that
will generally promote knee health. Losing all your knee ligaments is bad
news for pretty much any human, whatever their interests, and drinking
water is generally a good support for any human functioning. So the rough
approximation is good enough for some uses. But that kind of universal
prescription doesn’t work in every case. This is why there are no true best
practices for health—because the right thing to do depends on each person’s
different interests. The notion of health is messy, says Barnes, because
human interests are messy.
But if we take a simple, genuinely objective measure and use it as our
meaning of health , we can hide from the need to make choices. And we
have some very promising candidates for the bait and switch. There are
some qualities that are affiliated with many conceptions of health that are
easy to measure mechanically, such as longer lifespan and lower heart
attack rate. They are excellent candidates for standardized measurement.
And certainly they are decent as rough approximations for our shared
interests. But they are incomplete.
Let’s say we set the meaning of health in terms of some measurable
qualities: longer lifespan and lower incidence of measurable disease and
injury. Even this is a value decision; it sets certain interests above others. It
sets an interest in increasing the number of years and ignores the interest in
the quality of those years. It sets an interest in avoiding disease over an
interest in developing complex physical skills. It will tell me to run on a
treadmill instead of going trail running on difficult terrain, because trail
running is riskier and increases the chances of significant injury—and this

## Página 203

particular notion of health values avoiding injury over the development of
complex motor skills.
I’m not arguing that we can’t measure anything objectively or that
science doesn’t work. Some kinds of things can be measured precisely,
because their nature doesn’t vary with interests. We can measure, with
perfect objectivity and no information loss, inches, pounds, and calories.
But concepts like “health” are fundamentally unlike “calories.” A calorie is
independent of your values and interests. Health is dynamic and variable,
because it is essentially entangled with your interests. To be healthy is to
have your body and mind functioning as you wish. This involves a choice
about which aspects of your functioning you care more and less about. But
we can launder the concept of “health” and make it look entirely objective.
And if we accept that laundered “health,” we will be letting somebody else
make value decisions about how we should take care of our own bodies and
minds.
THINKING ABOUT REAL AND FAKE OBJECTIVITY ALSO HELPS us to answer one of
our big questions: When should we trust metrics, and when shouldn’t we?
When should we be worried about large-scale data collection, and when
should we be fine with it?
Very early in the Nicomachean Ethics , Aristotle warns that we should not
demand too much precision when it’s inappropriate. Some areas, like
engineering and science, allow for great precision. But you can’t expect the
same degree of precision in politics and ethics. It is, says Aristotle, the mark
of the educated person to seek the appropriate amount of precision for each
subject. And you can’t expect precision in politics and ethics, because what
we should do in these depends significantly on human autonomy and
choice.
To sum it up for the data and policy wonks in the audience, large-scale
data collection efforts will likely be most useful when they target those
qualities that:

## 1. are highly invariant and stable between contexts

## 2. have accessible, mechanical methods for being counted

## 3. do not involve a value decision

## Página 204

One of the reasons large-scale data collection works so well for figuring
out antibiotics is that antibiotics work in a relatively context-invariant way.
They are effective on most human bodies, regardless of the place,
psychology, or culture of the person. And the positive results of antibiotics
are easier to measure, because we can measure the disappearance of
bacteria mechanically.
Large-scale data collection efforts will more likely miss the mark for
qualities that:

## 1. are highly variant between contexts and dynamic

## 2. require a nonmechanical exercise of skill, sensitivity, or expertise in

order to be counted

## 3. involve a value decision

Metrics will not capture the goodness of wine because many important
qualities are highly dynamic and variant between different dynamic
contexts. They will not capture health because health involves a value
decision at its core. We can get rough approximations that are helpful for
large-scale population work, but we should not take them to be complete or
decisive for individuals.

## Página 205