# 14. Choice of Difficulty

## CHAPTER 14

Choice of Difficulty
he Angler is one of my favorite rock climbs in the world. It’s this
beautiful line—a perfect forty-five-degree ridge, running diagonally
T up an otherwise smooth face of sandstone. It’s not a very hard climb,
but it’s a Utah classic. It’s a technical problem: You don’t need much
strength, but you need extremely precise footwork and body control. The
handholds are strange slopy things, like a ridge made of warped bowling
balls. And the footholds are barely visible: just some tiny soft indentations
in the rock. To climb it, you have to inch over, never letting your hips come
too far back. It forces you into constant intentional, painstaking motion; it
requires delicate control of every limb. You become this patient spider-
thing, creeping across the landscape.
The boulder juts out into a river. In the spring, when the river is high, you
can actually end up dangling over the river for the grand finale. Your face is
jammed up against the rock, you can’t see a thing, and all you can hear is
the river’s roar. Then you throw your hand over the top, pull over—and
suddenly you’re standing on top of a perfect boulder, with the blue-green
river rushing all around you. It’s a moment of pure climbing ecstasy.
It is also, to outside observers, boring as shit. All the drama is in subtle
inner movements—tiny internal shifts in bodily tension, millimeter
differences in foot placement. All this is radiantly obvious to the climber
themselves. For the climber, it is a gorgeous experience of total absorption.
But to the observer, it basically looks like nothing. All you see is the
cringing movement of a snail-person inching across the rock face.
I don’t climb The Angler to impress people. If I wanted to wow non-
climbers, I’d climb something that looked spectacular. If I wanted to
impress climbers, I’d climb something harder. I climb The Angler because
the specific kind of difficulty calls something out of me that I don’t get

## Página 132

anywhere else—a particular, unforgettable, and distinctive experience of
grueling daintiness.
It is a feeling of elegance that is just for me.
NORMALLY, WHEN WE TALK ABOUT ART, WE THINK ABOUT OUR five senses—
sight, smell, taste, sound, and touch. These are our outward-facing senses,
which tell us about the world. The beauty of the traditional arts usually
appeals to those five outward-facing senses. But process art is often inward
facing. For physical movement, we have the inner senses—our
proprioceptive and kinesthetic senses. The proprioceptive sense is your
awareness of where your body is in space—your posture, the relative
position of your arms and legs. And your kinesthetic sense refers to your
inner sense of your own movement—the power and velocity of your arms.
In physical movements, such as yoga, much of the beauty appears to the
proprioceptive and kinesthetic senses.
There are all kinds of beauty we can find in our own bodies and minds.
One of my favorites is a feeling of being just right for a challenge—a sense
of harmony between your actions and the obstacles you face. You could call
it practical harmony . It is the beauty of a special, delicious fit between you
and the world.
I have made up my own little classification system for practical
harmonies. First, there’s the harmony of the solution . This is the beauty of a
solution that fits the problem exactly. It’s the perfect chess move, the right
little hip twist that gets you through the crux of a climb, or seeing exactly
where that Tetris block needs to go. It is the experience of perfect harmony
between your actions and the demands of the world. The world is the lock,
and you are the key.
The harmony of the solution often appears when things are easy. I climb
most gracefully when I’m far below my limit. But that’s not the only kind
of practical harmony. For many of us, the peak experience of games is not
when we come up with perfect solutions to easy problems. It’s when we are
pushed to our limit. We often lose out on the harmony of the solution here.
When I’m climbing at my limit, I’m sloppy, shaking, imperfect. But it feels
absolutely amazing. This is a different kind of harmony; let’s call it the
harmony of capacity . This happens when an obstacle takes everything you
have. It is a harmony between your maximum capacity and the precise

## Página 133

demands of the world. It’s not just that your action fits the world; it’s that
you—your whole self—are just barely enough for the job.
Many of us crave the harmony of capacity. This is one of the reasons why
we seek well-matched opponents, or climbs at the edge of our ability. This
is why we dial up the difficulty level in our video games. We want the
pleasure that only comes when we have to give it our all and just barely
scrape by. It is the joy of being exactly what the situation calls for—no
more, no less.
In real life, the harmony of capacity is incredibly rare. Most of the time,
we do not fit the world so nicely. Sometimes the world is far too hard for
us, asking us to throw ourselves at overwhelming problems, like
generations-long ethnic conflicts, or a global pandemic, or the wanton
destruction of natural ecosystems. Other times, the world is far too easy. It
demands that we grind, boringly, at things far below our abilities. Most of
the time, either we struggle and fail, or we succeed in boredom. Once in a
while we get a hard problem, try with all our might, and just barely solve it
—but this is rare magic.
Games are far more malleable than the world. Part of the glory of games
is that we can choose the obstacle we want to face. We can dial the
difficulty setting up or down, or change opponents, or change games, until
we find the level of delicious fit that we want. The harmony of capacity is
hard to find in the world, because the world was not made to fit us. But it is
easy to find in games—because in games, we make the world. In games, we
can manipulate the goals, the obstacles, and the environment, until they suit
our capacity—so that we can just soak in the harmony of perfect fit.
When you confront scoring systems in the world, they’re often fixed. But
games provide you with the possibility of adjusting the scoring system to
give you exactly the action you want. The purest form of striving play is
when we play for the beauty of the process. It is play for its own sake, for
the sheer, gorgeous feel of it. In aesthetic striving play , you don’t chase
victory because the points are actually important. You try to win in order to
experience the beauty of ecstatic action.
While I was writing this book, I was also learning to yo-yo. By the way,
if you haven’t seen what’s happened in the high end of modern yo-yo play,
you probably have no idea of how absolutely batshit gonzo creative modern
yo-yo play has gotten. (If you want a taste of some truly astonishing
players, go watch some YouTube videos: Tessa Piccillo’s wild slack-string

## Página 134

inventiveness in “Kodiak” was what inspired me to learn yo-yo. Also check
1
Jeffrey Pang’s “PNWR Yo Yo Contest 2015” documentary, and Charles
Haycock’s gorgeous stoner weirdness in “2016 Canada Return Top
Classics.”)
I was working on a classic yo-yo-trick as I was drafting this chapter—a
flipping, delightfully bumpy trick called Candy Rain. It was pretty tough in
the beginning, and I almost gave up. Trying the same movement over and
over again and missing every time is pretty frustrating. But then you start
hitting the trick, once every twenty times. And then something clicks; you
start getting it with some regularity. It demands everything; you have to
become this cool, elegant, laser-focused being. This is the glorious part.
And then it gets easy. A couple weeks later, I could knock off the trick
without thinking about it at all. This is about when it starts looking
impressive to the outside world, or at least to your bemused spouse and
kids. It turns into a pleasant background fidget, something I can do on
autopilot as I think of other things. But as a focused activity, it’s a little
boring. So I moved on to a harder trick, to start the process all over again.
This is just me. Not everybody is like this, and I’m not saying other
people should be. I like a particular spot on the difficulty curve: the moment
of epiphany, when things start coming together. So when I have free rein, I
pick my challenges to surf my favorite, tastiest spot on the learning curve.
But that’s just my preference. The world of yo-yo players seems to be full
of people like me. There is always some newer, harder trick to learn or
invent. Other people like to be elsewhere on the difficulty curve. Some
people like eternally repeating a skill they’ve already mastered. Others can
take a level of frustration and failure that I can’t handle, and crave games of
ungodly difficulty, like Dark Souls or winter mountaineering.
This is the incredible part of games: Whatever feeling you want,
whatever kind of absorption or intensity you desire, whatever level of
difficulty works for you at that moment, you can find it. Games offer you
the freedom to sculpt the world, the tasks, and the goal to give you
whatever kind of process you want. And they do it because the goals are
detached from the world—because you can modify the goals and
constraints for your own private joy.
But this is also why devoting yourself to a game can be pretty
embarrassing. For a grown-up human being—a parent, a professor, and
supposedly an adult—yo-yo is pretty much the most idiotic thing you can

## Página 135

do with your time. When I mention my yo-yoing in the company of real
adults, I get a lot of barely suppressed eye rolls and condescending
chuckles. Yo-yoing is unproductive. It is a profoundly dorky and difficult
discipline. Modern high-end yo-yo tricks demand razor-sharp timing and
precise control over throw angles. It is an enormous amount of energy to
hurl at something utterly useless.
One adult dinner, I found myself trying to hide what I’d been doing in
my spare time, until I finally admitted that I’d been learning to yo-yo. But
at least, I hurried to say, all this yo-yoing was part of a useful and
productive strategy for work. It was a handy little mental break while I was
writing; it refreshed my mind and made me more productive. I was trying to
justify my yo-yo habit in terms of how it would help my output. But I felt
ashamed afterward, because it was a lie. I had betrayed the true spirit of yo-
yo. Because the real reason I was doing it was just for the sheer joy of
physics made tangible. Yo-yo, for me, is an act of pure play.
YO-YOS HAVE CHANGED DRAMATICALLY IN THE PAST FEW DECADES . A yo-yo
consists of two balanced halves connected by a central axle—the part you
wrap the string around. Old-school yo-yos have wooden axles. The axle
itself doesn’t spin; it is fixed, glued into the rest of the yo-yo. The freedom
to spin happens in the slippage between the fixed wooden axle and the
string. But there’s also a lot of friction. When you throw one of these old-
school wooden fixies, the yo-yo will spin for a couple of seconds, then stop.
Over the twentieth century, yo-yos accumulated a huge number of
technological innovations, including spinning plastic axles and plastic
bodies. Those innovations reached a climax around 2000, when we got
what is recognizably the modern yo-yo. The axle is now made from
updated, precision-manufactured metal ball bearings, and it spins
extraordinarily well. The body is now lathed from aircraft-grade aluminum.
The result is a powerful yo-yo that can spin for minutes, with incredible
stability and flight control. These improvements enabled the modern
vocabulary of intensely complex, high-flying, string-tangling yo-yo tricks.
The first metal yo-yos kept the design language of older plastic yo-yos:
round, with most of the weight in the center. But then yo-yo designers
started exploring the new possibilities of metal. They produced wildly
flared, V-shaped yo-yos with the weight pushed out to the outer rims.

## Página 136

Because of the physics of gyroscopes, this flared weight distribution makes
yo-yos even more powerful—even longer-spinning and more stable.
It also tends to make them feel less sweet. These new, aggressive yo-yos
feel different. Players sometimes describe them as “thunky,” “thuddy,” and
like “bricks on string.” They snap back to your hand with a harsh bite. But
these hyperaggressive yo-yos absolutely make it easier to land tricks, so
they’ve become dominant in the competition scene.
Some designers still make yo-yos with old-school round shapes—now
called “organic” yo-yos—though mostly still with metal and high-end ball
bearings. These organic yo-yos are designed to feel sweet on the string.
They corner and turn with a pleasing grace and softness. In yo-yoer terms,
they feel “floaty.” Some designers even tune them to maximize the sweet
bell sounds when the string pings against the sides. It is also much harder to
land tricks on them. If you’re competing, you’re going to be using a harsh,
modern, aggressive yo-yo. Playing with organic yo-yos requires far more
focus to pull off the same tricks with—if, that is, it’s even the same trick.
Right now I’m working on a trick called Seismic Slam. This trick
involves a big finale in which you have to do a whip multiple times in a
row. This is where you form a loop with the yo-yo string, throw it like a
lasso, and whip it around the yo-yo in midair. The first time I pulled off the
whip sequence, I giggled like a maniac and skipped around the room with
pure joy.
With a modern, high-end, aggressive, competition-style yo-yo, I can do
the trick pretty easily. Doing the same trick with an organic yo-yo is far
harder; those yo-yos are deeply unforgiving of micro-errors. You might
think using an organic yo-yo is kind of stupid because it makes it harder to
do the same trick. But remember Bernard Suits: The goal of a game is
constituted by the constraints you take on. So trying to do the trick with the
added constraint of using an organic yo-yo is a different goal . Using an
organic yo-yo turns it into a different game—a harder one that demands
more focus and precision. And I can choose the game that pleases me.
It turns out I have an enormous amount of control over the game of yo-
yoing—over which exact game of yo-yoing I want to play. I can fiddle with
it, fine-tune it. I can choose the goals and constraints that give me the
experience I want.
But sometimes, I might be in a social context that fixes the scoring
system out of my control. In the yo-yo competition scene, you get points for

## Página 137

doing a visibly harder trick, but not for using a more difficult, organic yo-
yo. Yo-yo competitions don’t judge you on the inner thing—how hard it
was to complete your trick. Judges score you on the outward thing—the
trick you completed. That’s because a tournament judge can’t look inside
your soul and see how difficult it was for you. A judge can, however, easily
see that you looped the yo-yo three times around your neck and then landed
it behind your back. The demand for public judgment in relatively objective
terms drags the entire process away from inner fine-tuning and toward a
shared scoring system.
ED HAPONIK IS ONE OF THE GURUS OF THE YO-YO SCENE. HE’D been immersed in
the modern competition-style tricks, done on fancy, aggressive, high-end
yo-yos, but it all was starting to leave him cold. So he tried something else:
He went old-school. He went back to those old, one-piece, carved wooden
fixed-axle yo-yos. These are absurdly low-performance by modern
standards. They’re incredibly narrow and wobbly, and they have almost no
spin time. Doing modern tricks with these things is like doing a technical
mountain bike ride with one of those Victorian penny-farthing bicycles.
Recently, modern yo-yo trick inventors have discovered a new kind of
trick—a stall—that works best on an old-school fixed-axle yo-yo. A stall
involves stopping the yo-yo’s spin mid-trick by tangling it up on its own
string, and then restarting it. And this is where Haponik found a solution to
his malaise. The difficulty of working with old-school fixies cultivated, for
him, a particular kind of careful, blissed-out mental state. Haponik ended up
exploding the vocabulary of stall tricks, and helping birth a new style of yo-
yoing—one where you are taking advantage of the specific physics of a
fixed-axle yo-yo, stalling and restarting it every few seconds in a
delightfully weird stutter.
Haponik is also a martial artist, skateboarder, yoga practitioner, and
meditator. Yo-yo, for him, is just one of the many practices that cultivate
intense awareness. What draws him to his chosen martial art—the Japanese
sword arts—is not self-defense. It is how the sword arts cultivate an
experience of constant controlled attention to every movement. And that
starts before the swordplay—in how you draw the sword, how you breathe
before you draw the sword, and how you walk into the dojo.

## Página 138

A yo-yo does the same thing, he says, except it exchanges the mortal
combat part for pure frivolity. “To me,” he says, “a yo-yo is a temple that
2
you can stick in your pocket and walk around with.”
Right now, I can get up from my laptop, take a break from working on
this book, and yo-yo. I can lose myself in that state of meditative
attentiveness, of delicate intentional movement to control the yo-yo in
sensuous flight. I can choose a sweet floaty yo-yo, an aggressive hyper-
stable yo-yo, or a delightfully sensitive wooden fixie. Or I can turn on my
computer and fight through complex card-based strategic planning with
Monster Train and look for clever special-power combos. Or I can break
my brain with the alternate-world physics of my favorite puzzle video
game, Baba Is You , which I know will send me into raging frustration and
then give me the glorious sensation of total mind-expanding genius when I
finally solve a puzzle.
When the world doesn’t force a game and a scoring system on me, I can
pick the one that suits me. I can seek whatever thrills, whatever strange
form of beauty, whatever meditative state I want. I have a choice of
difficulty. And I can flitter between them with ease.

## Página 139