# 26. Play for Its Own Sake

## CHAPTER 26

Play for Its Own Sake
rocess beauty is everywhere. But a lot of the time, we ignore it. It
seems less important, less meaningful than object beauty. All the high
P arts, the really respectable ones, seem to be the ones where a singular
genius broadcasts their art out to us lowly masses, and we just soak it up in
relative passivity. And what gets mocked as low geek culture—tabletop
role-playing, fan fiction, cosplay—are exactly those communities where
everybody gets to be creative, and actively participate in the process of
making art.
But why is object art so much better? Why is it better for beauty to be in
external, separate objects than to reside in us? Why is it better to
concentrate the power to make art in a few geniuses? Why do we seem to
look down on those lifestyles that disperse the right to creativity across an
entire community?
Maybe it’s because we’ve mostly forgotten that processes can be valuable
in and of themselves. We have gotten used to attributing value only to the
stuff we make, the countable outcomes we achieve—and not the actions we
take to create them. We have come to value perfect finished art and mostly
given up the opportunity to be soaked in the creative process ourselves.
This outcomes obsession may start on the factory line—where we need to
make sure that each station outputs enough stuff for the next step. But it has
infected outward to everything else. We have started caring about fitness
only when it yields a countable improvement in our capacity. We have
started caring about art only when it makes a saleable object that we can
transfer.
It hasn’t always been that way. For Aristotle, the ultimate value in human
life lay not in the products of our activity but in the activity itself. Meaning
and value in life came in the doing and the making, and not in the stuff that

## Página 223

we made. For Aristotle, the final seat of value is in autotelic activity . This
means activity that’s valuable for its own sake. To put it in our lingo: The
meaning of life is not in the outcome but the process. (There’s a familiar
slogan, “The journey is the destination,” which seems to be one of the last
surviving remnants of this Aristotelean way of thinking.)
Bernard Suits, our philosopher of games, put it this way: Imagine utopia.
In this imaginary utopia, all of our practical problems will have been solved
—all our medical problems, all our resource scarcity problems, all our
psychological problems. So what will we have to do with our time? We will
play games, he says, or we will be bored out of our minds. And if games are
what we do in utopia, then they must be the meaning of life.
This argument might sound ridiculous at first. But Suits is just putting his
own modern spin on an old Aristotelean argument. (Suits himself was an
Aristotle scholar and a self-declared Aristotle fanboy.) One way to put the
Aristotelean argument, rephrased for modern ears, goes something like this:
What is the meaning of your life? OK, you have a nice job, but what’s that
for? It gives you money. Well, what’s that money for? To buy nice cars and
have nice watches. But what’s that for? To impress people, to get a better
job and even more money. But what is all that for? Et cetera, et cetera, on
and on. What ultimately justifies all the hard work we put into making and
getting all that stuff?
The stuff we make is certainly useful. It helps us to stay alive—feeds us,
eases our pain, shelters us. And it helps us do even more work more
efficiently. But still, what’s the point of staying alive and working
efficiently, if all you’re doing is just making more useless stuff? Where does
the meaning get into the system?
Aristotle’s answer is that at the end of the day, some activity must be
valuable for its own sake. Autotelic activity is what injects meaning into the
system. And games, for Suits, make autotelic activity vivid. Because why
would you take unnecessary constraints that make the outcomes harder to
get to? The answer must be that what you value is the process—a particular
kind of interesting action—and not just the outcome. The value of games
was, for Suits, a microcosm of the meaning of life.
Not every game is autotelic. Sometimes, Suits said, we simply use games
as tools to get something else. The Olympic athlete who only cares about
the glory, the boxer who just needs to win a big prize match to support their
family—these people are involved with games, but what they are doing is

## Página 224

work . They’re using games as a tool to get some other outcome. But there is
another way to interact with games, for the sake of the process itself. This,
says Suits, is play .
Suits had a particular definition of play. To play, he said, is to take some
resource that is normally instrumentally useful and divert it to autotelic
activity. For instance, you’re playing when you take your ability to do math,
which would be useful for accounting and engineering, and use it to have
fun solving sudoku puzzles. You’re playing when you take your ability to
fight, which is useful in war and self-defense, and then start entering
1
Brazilian jiujitsu tournaments for the pure thrill of it. To play, according to
Suits, is to take a resource that is normally useful for practical work and just
do it for its own sake.
You might be tempted to say that play is wasting useful resources just for
fun. Except for Suits, it isn’t really a waste. Play only seems like a waste of
time if you’re stuck in the outcomes mindset, in which doing something is
worthwhile only if it yields some valuable product. For Suits, the real waste
would be spending your whole life accumulating potentially useful
resources and never actually using them to do anything meaningful. You
work so that you have the time to play.
But we forget this. We forget about the value of the process and get stuck
on the value of the outcomes, because outcomes are easy to track. That’s
what an outcome is: some countable physical product or measurable
increase in our powers, whose worth can be described in publicly accessible
terms. But if Aristotle is right, then what’s really valuable is something far
subtler: rich, interesting, complicated, dense action. And the inner value of
action is often extremely hard to capture in publicly accessible terms.
OK, oversimplification time. Let’s divide the world into processes and
outcomes. Processes are the activity of doing something, and outcomes are
what we get out of it at the end. Suppose Aristotle and Suits are right, and
what makes our lives good and fulfilling is rich, meaningful activity. The
meaning of life is in the process and not the outcome. Meaning lies in
doing: in thinking interesting thoughts, having interesting conversations,
playing fascinating games. Meaning lies in the process of making things, in
moving your body in thrilling and elegant ways, in loving people.
Of course, we also need outcomes. Outcomes are very useful. Some of
our activities end up making stuff: shelter, transportation, nutrition, and
medicine, all of which we need to survive. But the true value of those things

## Página 225

is in the wonderful activities they help us get to, the lovely processes they
support. Outcomes are valuable only as means to our true ends: having
lovely conversations, thinking interesting thoughts, moving in thrilling,
beautiful ways. Outcomes are good only if they eventually cash out in
meaningful action. Otherwise, they are empty—just tools bereft of purpose.
This will be especially true if what makes something really meaningful is
deeply personal—and if what’s meaningful to you is deeply dependent on
the particular weirdness of your personality, culture, and circumstances in
life. But the physical stuff we make and the measurable increases in our
capacities are easy to track. It’s hard to measure the joy and wonder of a
good trail run, but it’s easy to measure your increased lung capacity,
improved running speed, and reduced body weight.
The more the world converges on the metric and eliminates any stuff that
doesn’t hit the metric, the easier it will be for us to collectively forget that
there was any other point to doing anything, except to hit that metric.
What we need are reminders from outside the convergence.
One of the major criticisms of large-scale modern agriculture is that
monocultures are very fragile. If the majority of our farms are growing one
variety of corn using one farming method, then we become incredibly
vulnerable. One deadly corn virus or beetle infestation and we lose our food
supply. This is part of the reason why biodiversity is important. We need
old-growth forests, untamed jungles, and fetid swamps because they are
preserves for life outside the farming monoculture.
Our world is dominated by a value monoculture. And not just any value
monoculture, but one dominated by measurable outcomes. So to save
ourselves, we need some kind of wild preserve—some haven for meaning
diversity. We need places in life where a sense of meaningfulness and value
runs wild.
And we can’t just see it from afar. What’s valuable is often subtle. We
need to be soaked in it for a long while, to catch on. To be reminded of
what’s important outside the monoculture, we would need regular exposure.
And if we have forgotten how to think of value and importance beyond
measurable outcomes—if we have forgotten the value of processes and
action—then we will need frequent, lasting, intense encounters with these
wild values.
But we can’t be trusted to stumble into them randomly or build them on
our own. Valuable activities are often very specific and hard to find on your

## Página 226

own. We need recipes and instructions. We need structured tools to ease our
passage out of the world of standardized outcomes and into the world of
beautiful processes. And we need lots of them, wildly different ones, to
explore. We need a diversity of prepackaged value starter kits, to help us
find our way back into varied, beautiful action. But we should also expect
those value starter kits to look stupid, inane, and useless from the
perspective of the outcomes mindset—precisely because they drag us away
from a lifestyle laser-focused on efficient outcomes.
And for those of us who have been raised and nurtured in the metrified
world of outcomes and measures, who are used to orienting ourselves
toward a clear external measure of success, it would be useful if those
starter kits resembled the metrified world of outcomes. It would be useful if
they had, at their heart, something familiar—some kind of clear ranking or
scoring system—so that we who were raised in the metrified world could
feel comfortable and secure. We need metrics methadone. But we would
want those starter kits to eventually draw our gaze past those rankings and
toward beautiful processes.
It’s goddamn games.

## Página 227